* Introduction

** Dungeon World
Dungeon World is a world of fantastic adventure. A world of magic, gods and
demons, of good and evil, law and chaos. Brave heroes venture into the most
dangerous corners of the land in search of gold and glory.

Adventurers take many shapes in Dungeon World. The races of elves, men, dwarves,
and halflings all have their heroes. Some are near-invincible beasts of battle
encased in iron armor. Others are more mysterious, conjuring up and wielding the
mighty forces of magic. Treasure and glory are sought by a holy cleric, a tricky
thief, a mighty paladin, and more.

It isn’t all easy heroics and noble bravery, though. Every time the ranger
guides his friends through the ancient woods there are a hundred things waiting
to bite his head off. Slavering hordes of goblin troops, maybe. Or is this the
Cursed Wood, where dwells the Gray Witch? Or the throngs of hateful dead,
looking to drag a meaty corpse back to their lair? Scary, sure, but there’s
treasure, too. More gold and jewels and magic lost to man have fallen between
the cracks in the world than you can imagine. Who better to retrieve it than a
band of stalwart heroes?

You and your friends /are/ those heroes. You go where others can’t or won’t.
There are monstrous things lurking in the world. Are you ready to face them?
** The Bard
The poems say an adventurer’s life is all open roads and the glory of coin and
combat. The tales told in every farmhand-filled inn have to have some ring of
truth to them, don’t they? The songs to inspire peasantry and royals alike—to
soothe the savage beast or drive men to a frenzy—have to come from somewhere.

Enter the bard. You, with your smooth tongue and quick wit. You teller-of-tales
and singer-of-songs. A mere minstrel can retell a thing, but it takes a true
bard to live it. Strap on your boots, noble orator. Sharpen that hidden dagger
and take up the call. Someone’s got to be there, fighting shoulder-to-shoulder
with the goons and the thugs and the soon-to-be-heroes. Who better than you to
write the tale of your own heroism?

Nobody. Get going.
** The Cleric
The lands of Dungeon World are a gods-forsaken mess. They’re lousy with the
walking dead, beasts of all sorts, and the vast unnatural spaces between safe
and temple-blessed civilizations. It is a godless world out there. That’s why it
needs you.

Bringing the glory of your god to the heathens isn’t just in your nature—it’s
your calling. It falls to you to proselytize with sword and mace and spell, to
cleave deep into the witless heart of the wilds and plant the seed of divinity
there. Some say that it’s best to keep the gods close to your heart. You know
that’s rubbish. God lives at the edge of a blade.

Show the world who is lord.
** The Druid
Cast your eyes around the fire. What has brought you to these people, stinking
of the dust and sweat of the city? Perhaps it is a kindness—do you protect them
as the mother bear watches over her cubs? Are they your pack, now? Strange
brothers and sisters you have. Whatever your inspiration, they would certainly
fail without your sharp senses and sharper claws.

You are of the sacred spaces; you are born of soil and wear the marks of her
spirits on your skin. You may have had a life before, maybe you were a city
dweller like them, but not now. You’ve given up that static shape. Listen to
your allies pray to their carved stone gods and polish their silver shells. They
speak of the glory they’ll find back in that festering town you left behind.

Their gods are children, their steel is false protection. You walk the old ways,
you wear the pelts of the earth itself. You’ll take your share of the treasure,
but will you ever walk as one of them? Only time will tell.
** The Fighter
It’s a thankless job—living day to day by your armor and the skill of your arm,
diving heedlessly into danger. They won’t be playing golden horns for the time
you took that knife to the ribs for them in the bar in Bucksberg. No flock of
angels will sing of the time you dragged them, still screaming, from the edge of
the Pits of Madness, no.

Forget them.

You do this for the guts and the glory, for the scream of battle and the hot,
hot blood of it. You are a beast of iron. Your friends may carry blades of
forged steel but, fighter, you are steel. While your traveling companions might
moan about their wounds around a campfire in the wilderness, you bear your scars
with pride.

You are the wall—let every danger smash itself to dust on you. In the end,
you’ll be the last one standing.
** The Paladin
Hell awaits. An eternity of torment in fire or ice or whatever best suits the
sins of the damned throngs of Dungeon World. All that stands between the pits of
that grim torture and salvation is you. Holy man, armored war machine, templar
of the Good and the Light, right? The cleric may say his prayers at night to the
gods, dwelling in their heavens. The fighter may wield his sharp sword in the
name of “good” but you know. Only you.

Eyes, hands, and sweet killing blow of the gods, you are. Yours is the gift of
righteousness and virtue—of justice, of Vision, too. A purity of intent that
your companions do not have.

So guide these fools, paladin. Take up your holy cause and bring salvation to
the wastrel world.

Vae victis, right?
** The Ranger
These city-born folk you travel with. Have they heard the call of the wolf? Felt
the winds howl in the bleak deserts of the East? Have they hunted their prey
with the bow and the knife like you? Hell no. That’s why they need you.

Guide. Hunter. Creature of the wilds. You are these things and more. Your time
in the wilderness may have been solitary until now, but the call of some greater
thing—call it fate if you like—has cast your lot with these folk. Brave, they
may be. Powerful and strong, too. But only you know the secrets of the spaces
between.

Without you, they’d be lost. Blaze a trail through the blood and dark, strider.
** The Thief
You’ve heard them, sitting around the campfire. Bragging about this battle or
that, or about how their gods are smiling on your merry band. You count your
coins and smile to yourself—this is the thrill above all. You alone know the
secret of Dungeon World: filthy, filthy lucre.

Sure, they give you lip for all the times you’ve snuck off alone, but without
you, every one of them would have been dissected by a flying guillotine or
poisoned straight to death by some ancient needle trap. So let them complain.
When you’re done with all this delving you’ll toast their heroes’ graves.

From your castle. Full of gold. You rogue.
** The Wizard
Dungeon World has rules. Not the laws of men or the rule of some petty tyrant.
Bigger, better rules. You drop something—it falls. You can’t make something out
of nothing. The dead stay dead, right?

Oh, the things we tell ourselves to feel better about the long, dark nights.

You’ve spent so very long poring over those tomes of yours. Conducting
experiments that nearly drove you mad and casting summonings that endangered
your very soul. For what? For power. What else is there? Not just the power of
King or Country but the power to boil a man’s blood in his veins. To call on the
thunder of the sky and the churn of the roiling earth. To shrug off the rules
the world holds so dear.

Let them cast their sidelong glances. Let them call you “warlock” or
“diabolist.” Who among them can hurl fireballs from their eyes?

Yeah. Didn’t think so.
* Why?
Why play Dungeon World?

First, to see the characters do *amazing things*. To see them explore the
unexplored, slay the undying, and go from the deepest bowels of the world to the
highest peaks of the heavens. To see them caught up in momentous events and
grand tragedies.

Second, to see them *struggle together*. To gather as a party despite their
differences and stand united against their foes, or to argue over treasure,
debate battle plans, and join in righteous celebration over a victory hard-won.

Third, because *the world still has so many places to explore*. There are
unlooted tombs and dragon hoards dotting the countryside just waiting for
quick-fingered and strong-armed adventurers to discover them. That unexplored
world has plans of its own. Play to see what they are and how they’ll change the
lives of our characters.
* How to Use This Book
This book is going to teach you how to play Dungeon World. If you’re going to be
the GM, you’re going to need to read the whole thing, though you can skim
through the monster stats for now and save the Advanced Delving chapter for
later. Try printing the play aids too, they’ll help you see what’s most
important. If you’re a player, you might not need to read more than Playing the
Game—a lot of the rules in Dungeon World will be contained in the character
sheets you use during the game itself. You’ll come back to the text a few times
throughout your game to refer to certain rules, but it should be a rare
occasion.
* Setting Up
To play Dungeon World, you’ll need to gather yourself and 2–5 friends. A group
of 4 to 6, including you, is best. Choose one person to be the Game Master (GM).
Everyone else will be players, taking the role of the characters in the game (we
call these the player characters or PCs). As you play, the players say what
their characters say, think, and do. The GM describes everything else in the
world.

You can play a single session or string together multiple sessions into a
campaign. Plan accordingly if you plan on playing a campaign, maybe setting
aside a night of the week to play. Each session will usually be a few hours and
you’ll be able to start playing right away within the first session.

You’ll need to print some materials. Before you start a new game, find or print
off at least:
    - A few copies of the basic and special moves
    - One copy of each class sheet
    - One copy each of the cleric and wizard spell sheets
    - One copy of the adventure sheet and GM moves
    - Miscellanea such as: pens and pencils, scrap paper for maps and notes,
      maybe some index cards
Everyone at the table will need something to write with and some six-sided dice.
Two dice is the minimum but two dice per player is a good idea.

You’ll also need some specialized dice: four-sided, eight-sided, ten-sided and
twelve-sided. One of each is enough but more is better: you won’t have to pass
them around so much.
* What’s Dungeon World Like to Play?
Playing Dungeon World is all about finding out what happens when your characters
encounter dangerous and exciting monsters, strange ruins, and unusual people on
their quest for gold and glory. It’s a conversation between the players and the
GM—the GM tells the players what they see and hear in the world around them and
the players say what their characters are thinking, feeling, and doing.
Sometimes those descriptions will trigger a move—something that’ll cause
everyone to stop and say “time to roll the dice to see what happens.” For a
moment everyone hangs on the edges of their seats as the dice clatter to a stop.
Tension and excitement are always the result, no matter how the dice land.

As you play your characters they’ll change from their adventures and gain
experience while learning about the world, overcoming monsters, and gathering
riches. You’ll discover how they feel about each other and where their moral
compass points them. When they accrue enough experience they’ll gain levels,
becoming more powerful and having more options to explore.

You can play Dungeon World with the same group, session to session, over a long
series of adventures, watching your characters change and grow together. You can
play it as a self-contained game in a single-session, too. Whether a long
campaign or a one-shot, Dungeon World’s rules are here to guide you and help you
create a world of fantasy adventure. Time to get out there and explore it!
* Playing the Game
Playing Dungeon World means having a conversation; somebody says something, then
you reply, maybe someone else chimes in. We talk about the fiction—the world of
the characters and the things that happen around them. As we play, the rules
will chime in, too. They have something to say about the world. There are no
turns or rounds in Dungeon World, no rules to say whose turn it is to talk.
Instead players take turns in the natural flow of the conversation, which always
has some back-and-forth. The GM says something, the players respond. The players
ask questions or make statements, the GM tells them what happens next. Dungeon
World is never a monologue; it’s always a conversation.

The rules help shape the conversation of play. While the GM and the players are
talking, the rules and the fiction are talking, too. Every rule has an explicit
fictional trigger that tells you when it is meant to come into the conversation.

Like any conversation, the time you spend listening is just as important as the
time you spend talking. The details established by the other people at the table
(the GM and the other players) are important to you: they might change what
moves you can make, set up an opportunity for you, or create a challenge you
have to face. The conversation works best when we all listen, ask questions, and
build on each other’s contributions.

This chapter is all about how to play Dungeon World. Here, you’ll find
information about the rules—how they arise from and contribute to the game.
We’ll cover both general rules, like making moves, and more specific rules, like
those for dealing with damage and hit points.
*** Ability Scores and Modifiers
Many of the rules discussed in this chapter rely on a player character’s
abilities and their modifiers. The abilities are Strength, Constitution,
Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. They measure a player character’s
raw ability in each of those areas on a scale from 3 to 18, where 18 is the peak
of mortal ability.

Each ability has a modifier associated with it that is used when rolling with
that ability. These are written as three-letter abbreviations: Str, Con, Dex,
Int, Wis, Cha. Modifiers range from -3 to +3. The modifier is always derived
from the current ability score.
** Making Moves
The most basic unit of rules in Dungeon World is the move. A move looks like
this:
When you *attack an enemy in melee*, roll+Str. ✴On a 10+, you deal your damage
to the enemy and avoid their attack. At your option, you may choose to do +1d6
damage but expose yourself to the enemy’s attack. ✴On a 7–9, you deal your
damage to the enemy and the enemy makes an attack against you.
Moves are rules that tell you when they trigger and what effect they have. A
move depends on a fictional action and always has some fictional effect.
“Fictional” means that the action and effect come from the world of the
characters we’re describing. In the move above the trigger is “when you attack
an enemy in melee.” The effect is what follows: a roll to be made and differing
fictional effects based on the outcome of the roll.

When a player describes their character doing something that triggers a move,
that move happens and its rules apply. If the move requires a roll, its
description will tell you what dice to roll and how to read their results.

A character can’t take the fictional action that triggers a move without that
move occurring. For example, if Isaac tells the GM that his character dashes
past a crazed axe-wielding orc to the open door, he makes the defy danger move
because its trigger is “when you act despite an imminent threat.” Isaac can’t
just describe his character running past the orc without making the defy danger
move and he can’t make the defy danger move without acting despite an imminent
threat or suffering a calamity. The moves and the fiction go hand-in-hand.

Everyone at the table should listen for when moves apply. If it’s ever unclear
if a move has been triggered, everyone should work together to clarify what’s
happening. Ask questions of everyone involved until everyone sees the situation
the same way and then roll the dice, or don’t, as the situation requires.

The GM’s monsters, NPCs, and other assorted beasties also have moves, but they
work differently.
*** Moves and Dice
Most moves include the phrase “roll+x” where “x” is one of your character’s
ability modifiers (CON for example). Unless the move tells you otherwise, that
“roll” always means that you roll two six-sided dice and add their results to
the value of the modifier. Some moves will have you add some other value to your
roll instead of an ability modifier.
I’m making a move that asks me to roll+STR and my STR modifier is +1. I rolled
two six-sided dice, got a one and a four. My total is six.
The results always fall into three basic categories. A total of 10 or higher
(written 10+) is the best outcome. A total of 7–9 is still a success but it
comes with compromises or cost. A 6 or lower is trouble, but you also get to
mark XP.

Each move will tell you what happens on a 10+ and a 7–9. Most moves won’t say
what happens on a 6-, that’s up to the GM but you also always mark XP.

Damage rolls work a little differently. They use different dice depending on who
or what is dealing damage.
*** Moves and Equipment
The most important role of a character’s equipment is to help describe the moves
they make. A character without a weapon of some sort isn’t going to trigger the
hack and slash move when fighting a dragon since a bare-knuckle punch really
doesn’t do much to inch-thick scales. It doesn’t count for the purposes of
triggering the move.

Likewise, sometimes equipment will avoid triggering a move. Climbing a sheer icy
cliff is usually defying danger, but with a good set of climbing gear you might
be able to avoid the imminent danger or calamity that triggers the move.

Weapons are particularly likely to modify what moves you can trigger. A
character with a dagger can easily stab the goblin gnawing on his leg,
triggering hack and slash, but the character with a halberd is going to have a
much harder time bringing it to bear on such a close foe.

Items and gear of every sort have tags. Tags are terms to describe things. Some
tags have a specific effect on the rules (things like damage reduction on armor
or a magical bonus to a particular kind of move or stat). Other tags are purely
about the fiction (like the close tag, which describes the length of a weapon
and how near your enemies need to be for you to attack them). Tags help you
describe your character’s actions when the items are being used and they give
the GM information about how the items you’re using might go wrong or cause
complications when you fail a roll.
*** The Effects of Moves
The effects of moves are always about the fictional world the characters
inhabit. A 10+ on hack and slash doesn’t just mean the mechanical effects, it
means you successfully attacked something and did some type of harm to it.

Once you’ve figured out what the effects of the move are, apply them to the
fiction and go back to the conversation. Always return to what’s going on in the
game.

Some moves have immediate mechanical effects, like dealing damage or giving
someone a bonus to their next roll. These effects are always a reflection of the
fictional world the characters are in; make sure to use the fiction when
describing the effects of the move.
**** Some Moves…
…Use the phrase “deal damage.” Dealing damage means you roll the damage dice for
your class; sometimes your weapon will add or subtract damage too. You use your
damage dice any time you make an attack that could reasonably hurt your target.
Usually that means you’re wielding a weapon, but your fists can be weapons with
the right training or an interesting situation

…Say “take +1 forward.” That means to take +1 to your next move roll (not
damage). The bonus can be greater than +1, or even a penalty, like -1. There
also might be a condition, such as “take +1 forward to hack and slash,” in which
case the bonus applies only to the next time you roll hack and slash, not any
other move.

…Say “take +1 ongoing.” That means to take +1 to all move rolls (not damage).
The bonus can be larger than +1, or it can be a penalty, like -1. There also
might be a condition, such as “take +1 ongoing to volley.” An ongoing bonus also
says what causes it to end, like “until you dismiss the spell” or “until you
atone to your deity.”

…Give you “hold.” Hold is currency that allows you to make some choices later on
by spending the hold as the move describes. Hold is always saved up for the move
that generated it; you can’t spend your hold from defend on trap expert or vice
versa, for example.

…Present a choice. The choice you make, like all move effects, dictates things
that happen in the fiction in addition to any more mechanical effects. The
choice you make on the 10+ result of hack and slash to deal more damage at the
cost of opening yourself up is exactly what’s happening to your character: they
have enough advantage that they can stay safe or push their luck.

…Give you a chance to say something about your character and their history. When
you spout lore you may get asked how you know the information that the GM
reveals. Take that opportunity to contribute to the game and show who your
character really is. Just keep in mind the established facts and don’t
contradict anything that’s already been described.

…Say “mark XP.” That means you add one to your current XP total.
** Harm and Healing
Cuts, bruises, and mortal wounds are common dangers for adventurers to face in
Dungeon World. In the course of play, characters will take damage, heal, and
maybe even die. A character’s health is measured by their hit points (HP).
Damage subtracts from HP. In the right conditions, or with medical or magical
help, damage is healed and HP is restored.
*** HP
A character’s HP is a measure of their stamina, endurance, and health. More HP
means the character can fight longer and endure more trauma before facing
Death’s cold stare.

Your class tells your maximum HP. Your Constitution (the ability, not the
modifier) comes into play as well, so more Constitution means more HP. If your
Constitution permanently changes during play you adjust your HP to reflect your
new Constitution score. Unless your Constitution changes your maximum HP stays
the same.
*** Damage
When a character takes damage they subtract the damage dealt from their current
HP. Armor mitigates damage; if a character has armor they subtract its value
from the damage dealt. This might mean a blow is turned away completely—that’s
fine, it’s what armor is for! Damage can never take a character below 0 HP.

Damage is determined by the attacker. Player characters deal damage according to
their class, the weapon used, and the move they’ve made.

If a move just says “deal damage” the character rolls their class’s damage dice
plus any bonuses or penalties from moves, weapons, or effects. If a move
specifies an amount of damage, use that in place of the class’s damage roll.

Monsters roll damage as listed in their description. Use this damage any time
the monster takes direct action to hurt someone, even if they use a method other
than their normal attack.

Other sources of damage—like being struck by a chunk of a collapsing tower, or
falling into a pit—are left to the GM based on these options:
    - It threatens bruises and scrapes at worst: d4 damage
    - It’s likely to spill some blood, but nothing horrendous: d6 damage
    - It might break some bones: d8 damage
    - It could kill a common person: d10 damage
Add the /ignores armor/ tag if the source of the damage is particularly large or
if the damage comes from magic or poison.

Temporary or circumstantial armor works the same way as armor that you wear: 1
armor for partial cover, 2 armor for major cover.

Damage is dealt based on the fiction. Moves that deal damage, like hack and
slash, are just a special case of this: the move establishes that damage is
being dealt in the fiction. Damage can be assigned even when no move is made, if
it follows from the fiction.

HP loss is often only part of the effect. If the harm is generalized, like
falling into a pit, losing the HP is probably all there is to it. When the harm
is specific, like an orc pulling your arm from its socket, HP should be part of
the effect but not the entirety of it. The bigger issue is dealing with the
newly busted arm: how do you swing a sword or cast a spell? Likewise having your
head chopped off is not HP damage, it’s just you being dead.
**** Damage From Multiple Creatures
It’s a brave monster that goes into battle alone. Most creatures fight with
someone at their side, and maybe another at their back, and possibly an archer
covering the rear, and so on. This can lead to multiple monsters dealing their
damage at once.

If multiple creatures attack at once roll the highest damage among them and add
+1 damage for each monster beyond the first.
A goblin orkaster (d10+1 damage ignores armor) and three goblins (d6 damage) all
throw their respective weapons—a magical acid orb for the orkaster, spears for
the rest—at Lux as she assaults their barricade. I roll the highest damage,
d10+1 ignores armor, and add +3 damage for the three other goblins. Adding it
all up I tell Lux she takes 9 damage ignoring armor as the acid leaks into the
scratches left by the spears.
**** Stun Damage
Stun damage is non-lethal damage. A PC who takes stun damage is defying danger
to do anything at all, the danger being “you’re stunned.” This lasts as long as
makes sense in the fiction—you’re stunned until you can get a chance to clear
your head or fix whatever stunned you. A GM character that takes stun damage
doesn’t count it against their HP but will act accordingly, staggering around
for a few seconds, fumbling blindly, etc.
**** Adding and Subtracting Damage
When a move tells you to add damage, you add that damage to the roll on the
dice. If it tells you to add some dice (like “+1d4 damage”) you roll that extra
dice and add its result to the total.

The same goes for subtracting damage: you subtract the number from the total
rolled. If you subtract a dice (like “-1d6 damage”) you subtract the rolled
amount from the original total. Damage never goes negative—0 damage is the
minimum.
**** Best and Worst
Some monsters and moves have you roll damage multiple times and take the best or
worst result. In this case roll as normal but only apply the best (or worst)
result.

If a monster rolls its d6 damage twice and takes the best result it’s written
b[2d6]. The b[] means “best.” Likewise, w[] means worst, so w[3d10] means “roll
a d10 for damage three times and use the worst result.”
*** Healing
There are two sources of healing in Dungeon World: medical aid and the passage
of time.

Medical aid, both magical and mundane, heals damage according to the move or
item used. Some moves may fully replenish HP while others heal just enough to
keep someone standing through a fight.

Whenever a character spends some time resting without doing anything to
aggravate their wounds they heal. The amount of healing is described in the
applicable moves: Make Camp for a night in a dangerous area, Recover for stays
in civilization.

No matter the source of the healing a character’s HP can never increase above
their maximum.
*** Death
Death stalks the edges of every battle. A character who is reduced to 0 HP
immediately takes his Last Breath. Death comes for commoner and king alike—no
stat is added to the Last Breath roll.

No one knows what lies beyond the Black Gates of Death, but it is said that many
secrets of the mortal plane are laid bare in the land of Death’s dominion. When
you die, you might just see them.

Death offers bargains to some, from the simple to the costly. Death is
capricious and may ask a favor in the future or exact a toll. He may demand a
sacrifice or ask for something strange and seemingly innocent. Death’s whim
cannot be predicted.

Depending on the outcome of the Last Breath the character may become stable. A
stable character stays at 0 HP but is alive and unconscious. If they receive
healing they regain consciousness and may return to battle or seek safety. If a
stable character takes damage again they draw their Last Breath once more and
return to face Death.
**** After Death
Being an adventurer isn’t easy—it’s cold nights in the wild and sharp swords and
monsters. Sooner or later, you’re going to make that long walk to the Black
Gates and give up the ghost. That doesn’t mean you have to give it the
satisfaction of sticking around. Death, in its way, is just another challenge to
conquer. Even dead adventurers can rise again.

If your character dies you can ask the GM and the other players to try and
resurrect you. The GM will tell them what it will cost to return your poor, dead
character to life. If you fulfill the GM’s conditions the character is returned
to life. The Resurrection spell is a special case of this: the magic of the
spell gives you an easier way to get a companion back, but the GM still has a
say.

No matter the prospects of resurrection for now you make a new character. Maybe
a hireling becomes a full-fledged adventurer worthy of a whole share and a part
in the real action. Maybe the characters in the party find a new friend in a
steading, willing to join them. Maybe your character had a vengeful family
member who now seeks to take up their blades and spells to make right what
happened. In any case, make your new character as you normally would at level 1.
If your original character returns to life you can play either character,
switching between them as you please (so long as it makes sense).

GM, when you tell the players what needs to be done to bring their comrade back,
don’t feel like it has to derail the flow of the current game. Weave it in to
what you know of the world. This is a great opportunity to change focus or
introduce an element you’ve been waiting to show off. Don’t feel, either, that
it has to be some great and epic quest. If the character died at the end of a
goblin pike, maybe all it takes is an awkward walk home and a few thousand gold
pieces donated to a local temple. Think about the ramifications of such a
charitable act and how it might affect the world. Remember: Death never forgets
a soul stolen from his realm.
*** Debilities
Losing HP is a general thing, it’s getting tired, bruised, cut, and so on. Some
wounds are deeper though. These are debilities.

*Weak (STR):* You can’t exert much force. Maybe it’s just fatigue and injury, or
 maybe your strength was drained by magic.

*Shaky (DEX):* You’re unsteady on your feet and you’ve got a shake in your
 hands.

*Sick (CON):* Something just isn’t right inside. Maybe you’ve got a disease or a
 wasting illness. Maybe you just drank too much ale last night and it’s coming
 back to haunt you.

*Stunned (INT):* That last knock to the head shook something loose. Brain not
 work so good.

*Confused (WIS):* Ears ringing. Vision blurred. You’re more than a little out of
 it.

*Scarred (CHA):* It may not be permanent, but for now you don’t look so good.

Not every attack inflicts a debility—they’re most often associated with magic,
poison, or stranger things like a vampire sucking your blood. Each debility is
tied to an ability and gives you -1 to that ability’s modifier. The ability’s
score is unaffected so you don’t have to worry about changing your maximum HP
when you’re sick.

You can only have each debility once. If you’re already Sick and something makes
you Sick you just ignore it.

Debilities are harder to heal than HP. Some high level magic can do it, sure,
but your best bet is getting somewhere safe and spending a few days in a soft,
warm bed. Of course, debilities are both descriptive and prescriptive: if
something happens that would remove a debility, that debility is gone.

Debilities don’t replace descriptions and using the established fiction. When
someone loses an arm that doesn’t mean they’re Weak, it means they have one less
arm. Don’t let debilities limit you. A specific disease can have whatever
effects you can dream up. Sick is just a convenient shorthand for some anonymous
fever picked up from a filthy rat.
** Magic
Dungeon World is a fantastic place: there’s more to it than mud, blood, and ale
in the tavern. Fire and wind conjured from the pure elements. Prayers for
health, might, and divine retribution. “Magic” is the name given to those
abilities not derived from the strength of man and beast but from forces beyond.

Magic means many things. The druid’s ability to take the shape of an animal is
magic, as are the practiced effects of the wizard and the divine blessings of
the cleric. Any ability that goes beyond the physically possible is magical.
*** Spells
Some classes, like the cleric and the wizard have access to spells: specific
magical effects that are the benefit of divine servitude or severe study. Each
spell has a name, tags, a level, and an effect.

The basic flow of magic is to know, prepare, cast, and forget a spell.

Known spells are those a spellcaster has mastered enough to prepare. The cleric
knows all cleric spells of their level or lower, including their rotes. The
wizard starts knowing their cantrips and three 1st level spells. When the wizard
gains a level they learn a new spell. The wizard stores their known spells in
their spellbook.

Even if a spellcaster knows a spell, they must have it prepared before they can
cast it. With some time and concentration, as described in the Commune and
Prepare moves, the spellcaster may choose known spells whose total levels are
less than or equal to the caster’s level plus 1 to prepare. The wizard always
prepares their cantrips; the cleric always prepares their rotes. A prepared
spell is ready to be cast.

Casting a spell involves calling on a deity, chanting, waving ones hands,
invoking mystical forces, and so on. To cast a spell you will usually make the
cast a spell move. On a 10+ the spell takes effect, on a 7–9 the caster finds
themself in trouble and must make a choice, but the spell is still cast. Some
spells are ongoing—once they’re cast they continue to have effect until
something ends it.

One option on a 7–9 result is to have the spell revoked or forgotten. A spell
that is revoked or forgotten is still known, but no longer prepared, and
therefore no longer castable. When the caster next Prepares or Communes they may
choose the same spell again.
** Character Change
Dungeon World is ever-changing. The characters change, too. As their adventures
progress, player characters gain experience (XP), which lets them level up. This
prepares them for greater danger, bigger adventures, and mightier deeds.

Advancement, like everything else in Dungeon World, is both prescriptive and
descriptive. Prescriptive means that when a player changes their character sheet
the character changes in the fiction. Descriptive means that when the character
changes in the fiction the player should change the character sheet to match.

This isn’t a benefit or detriment to the players or the GM; it’s not an excuse
to gain more powers or take them away. It’s just a reflection of life in Dungeon
World.
Avon, despite being a wizard, has risen to the notice of Lenoral, the deity of
arcane knowledge. After being blessed by an avatar of Lenoral and saying his
vows in the church, Avon is under the deity’s watch. He can fulfill Petitions
and gain boons like a cleric.
Gregor offers his signature weapon, an axe whose green steel is tempered in orc
blood, as a desperate bargain to save King Authen from eternal damnation.
Without his axe he gets none of the benefits of his signature weapon. Should he
recover it he’ll have access to its benefits again.
Descriptive changes only happen when the character has clearly gained access to
an ability. It’s not up to any one player to decide this—if you think a
character qualifies for a new ability, discuss it as a group.
*** Level Up
As you play Dungeon World, you’ll be doing three things most of all: exploring,
fighting dangerous foes, and gathering treasure. For each of these things you’ll
be rewarded XP at the end of the session. Acting according to your alignment and
fulfilling the conditions of your alignment moves will grant you XP at the end
of each session as well. If you resolve a bond and create a new one, you’ll gain
XP, too. Any time you roll a 6- you get XP right away. The GM may have special
conditions that you can fulfill to earn XP or might change the core ones to
reflect the world. They’ll let you know before you play.

When your characters have safety and a chance to rest, they’ll be able to make
the Level Up move to level up and gain new moves.
**** Multiclass Moves
The multiclass moves allow you to gain moves from another class. You get to
choose any move of your level or lower. For the purpose of multiclassing, any
starting class moves that depend on each other count as one move—the wizard's
cast a spell, spellbook, and prepare spells for example. If a move from another
class refers to your level, count your levels from the level where you first
gained a move from that class.
**** Requires and Replaces
Some moves that you gain at higher levels depend on other moves. If another move
is listed along with the word Requires or Replaces you can only gain the new
move if you have the listed move.

A move that requires another move can only be taken if you have the move it
requires already. You then have both moves and they both apply.

A move that replaces another move can only be taken if you have the move it
replaces already. You lose access to the replaced move and just have the new
one. The new move will usually include all the benefits of the replaced one:
maybe you replace a move that gives you 1 armor with one that gives you 2 armor
instead.
**** Beyond 10th Level
Once you’ve reached 10th level things change a little. When you have enough XP
to go to 11th level instead you choose one of these:
    - Retire to safety
    - Take on an apprentice
    - Change entirely to a new class
If you retire you create a new character to play instead and work with the GM to
establish your place in the world. If you take on an apprentice you play a new
character (the apprentice) alongside your current character, who stops gaining
XP. Changing classes means keeping your ability scores, race, HP, and whatever
moves you and the GM agree are core to who your character is. You lose all other
class moves, replacing them with the starting moves of your new class.
** Bonds
Bonds are what make you a party of adventurers, not just a random assortment of
people. They’re the feelings, thoughts, and shared history that tie you
together. You will always have at least one bond, and you’ll often have more.

Each bond is a simple statement that relates your character to another player
character. Your class gives you a few to start with, you’ll replace your
starting bonds and gain new ones through play.
*** Resolving Bonds
At the end of each session you may resolve one bond. Resolution of a bond
depends on both you and the player of the character you share the bond with: you
suggest that the bond has been resolved and, if they agree, it is. When you
resolve a bond, you get to mark XP.

A bond is resolved when it no longer describes how you relate to that person.
That may be because circumstances have changed—Thelian used to have your back
but after he abandoned you to the goblins, you’re not so sure. Or it could be
because that’s no longer a question—you guided Wesley before and he owed you,
but he paid that debt when he saved your life with a well-timed spell. Any time
you look at a bond and think “that’s not a big factor in how we relate anymore”
the bond is at a good place to resolve.

If you have a blank bond left over from character creation you can assign a name
to it or write a new bond in its place whenever you like. You don’t get an XP
for doing so, but you do get more defined bonds to resolve in the future.
*** Writing New Bonds
You write a new bond whenever you resolve an old one. Your new bond may be with
the same character, but it doesn’t have to be.

When you write a new bond choose another character. Pick something relevant to
the last session—maybe a place you traveled together or a treasure you
discovered. Choose a thought or belief your character holds that ties the two
together and an action, something you’re going to do about it. You’ll end up
with something like this:
Mouse’s quick thinking saved me from the white dragon we faced. I owe her a
boon.
Avon proved himself a coward in the dungeons of Xax’takar. He is a dangerous
liability to the party and must be watched.
Valeria’s kindness to the Gnomes of the Vale has swayed my heart, I will prove
to her I am not the callous fiend she thinks I am.
Xotoq won the Bone-and-Whispers Axe through trickery! It will be mine, I swear
it.
These new bonds are just like the old ones—use them, resolve them, replace them.
** Alignment
Alignment is your character’s way of thinking and moral compass. For the
character, this can be an ethical ideal, religious strictures, or maybe just a
gut instinct. It reflects the things your character might aspire to be and can
guide you when you’re not sure what to do next. Some characters might proudly
proclaim their alignment while others might hide it away. A character might not
say, “I’m an evil person,” but may instead say, “I put myself first.” That’s all
well and good for a character, but the world knows otherwise. Buried deep down
inside is the ideal self a person wants to become—it is this mystic core that
certain spells and abilities tap into when detecting someone’s alignment. Every
sentient creature in Dungeon World bears an alignment, be they an elf, a human,
or some other, stranger thing.

The alignments are Good, Lawful, Neutral, Chaotic, and Evil. Each one shows an
aspiration to be a different type of person.

Lawful creatures aspire to impose order on the world, either for their own
benefit or for that of others. Chaotic creatures embrace change and idealize the
messy reality of the world, prizing freedom above all else. Good creatures seek
to put others before themselves. Evil creatures put themselves first at the
expense of others.

A Neutral creature looks out for itself so long as that doesn’t jeopardize
someone else’s well-being. Neutral characters are content to live their lives
and pursue their own goals and let others do the same.

Most creatures are Neutral. They take no particular pleasure in harming others,
but will do it if it is justified by their situation. Those that put an ideal—be
it Law, Chaos, Good, or Evil—above themselves are harder to find.

Even two creatures of the same alignment can come into conflict. Aspiring to
help others does not grant infallibility, two Good creatures may fight and die
over two different views of how to do right.
*** Changing Alignment
Alignment can, and will, change. Usually such a change comes about as a gradual
move toward a decisive moment. Any time a character’s view of the world has
fundamentally shifted they can chose a new alignment. The player must have a
reason for the change which they can explain to the other players.

In some cases a player character may switch alignment moves while still keeping
the same alignment. This reflects a smaller shift, one of priority instead of a
wholesale shift in thinking. They simply choose a new move for the same
alignment from below and mention why their character now sees this as important.
**** Lawful
    - Uphold the letter of the law over the spirit
    - Fulfill a promise of import
    - Bring someone to justice
    - Choose honor over personal gain
    - Return treasure to its rightful owner
**** Good
    - Ignore danger to aid another
    - Lead others into righteous battle
    - Give up powers or riches for the greater good
    - Reveal a dangerous lie
    - Show mercy
**** Neutral
    - Make an ally of someone powerful
    - Defeat a personally important foe
    - Learn a secret about an enemy
    - Uncover a hidden truth
**** Chaotic
    - Reveal corruption
    - Break an unjust law to benefit another
    - Defeat a tyrant
    - Reveal hypocrisy
**** Evil
    - Take advantage of someone’s trust
    - Cause suffering for its own sake
    - Destroy something beautiful
    - Upset the rightful order
    - Harm an innocent
** Hirelings
Hirelings are those sorry souls that—for money, glory, or stranger needs—venture
along with adventurers into the gloom and danger. They are the foolhardy that
seek to make their name as adventurers.

Hirelings serve a few purposes. To the characters, they’re the help. They lend
their strength to the player characters’ efforts in return for their pay. To the
players, they’re a resource. They buy the characters some extra time against
even the most frightening of threats. They’re also replacement characters,
waiting to step up into the hero’s role when a player character falls. To the
GM, they’re a human face for the characters to turn to, even in the depths of
the earth or the far reaches of the planes.

Hirelings are not heroes. A hireling may become a hero, as a replacement
character, but until that time they’re just another GM character. As such their
exact HP, armor, and damage aren’t particularly important. A hireling is defined
by their *Skill* (or Skills) a *Cost* and a *Loyalty* score.

A hireling’s skill is a special benefit they provide to the players. Most skills
are related to class abilities, allowing a hireling to fill in for a certain
class. If you don’t have a ranger but you need to track the assassin’s route out
of Torsea anyway, you need a Tracker. Each skill has a rank, usually from 1 to
10. The higher the rank the more trained the hireling. Generally hirelings only
work for adventurers of equal or higher level than their highest skill.

Skills don’t limit what a hireling can do, they just provide mechanics for a
certain ability. A hireling with the protector skill can still carry your
burdens or check for traps, but the outcome isn’t guaranteed by a rule. It will
fall entirely to the circumstances and the GM. Sending a hireling to do
something that is clearly beyond their abilities is asking the GM for trouble.

No hireling works for free. The hireling’s cost is what it takes to keep them
with the player characters. If the hireling’s cost isn’t paid regularly (usually
once a session) they’re liable to quit or turn on their employers.

When hirelings are in play, the players may have to make the Order Hirelings
move. The move uses the loyalty of the hireling that triggered the move:
Hirelings do what you tell them to, so long as it isn’t obviously dangerous,
degrading, or stupid, and their cost is met. *When a hireling find themselves in
a dangerous, degrading, or just flat-out crazy situation due to your orders*
roll+loyalty. On a 10+ they stand firm and carry out the order. On a 7–9 they do
it for now, but come back with serious demands later. Meet them or the hireling
quits on the worst terms.
** Making a Hireling
Hirelings are easy to make on the fly. When someone enters the players’ employ
note down their name and what cost they’ve agreed to as well as any skills they
may have.

Start with a number based on where the hireling was found. Hirelings in villages
start with 2–5. Town hirelings get 4–6. Keep hirelings are 5–8. City hirelings
are 6–10. Distribute the hireling’s number between loyalty, a main skill, and
zero or more secondary skills. Starting loyalty higher than 2 is unusual, as is
starting loyalty below 0. Choose a cost for the hireling and you’re done.

A hireling’s stats, especially their loyalty, may change during play as a
reflection of events. A particular kindness or bonus from the players is worth
+1 loyalty forward. Disrespect is -1 loyalty forward. If it’s been a while since
their cost was last paid they get -1 loyalty ongoing until their cost is met. A
hireling's loyalty may be permanently increased when they achieve some great
deed with the players. A significant failure or beating may permanently lower
the hireling’s loyalty.
*** Costs
    - The Thrill of Victory
    - Money
    - Uncovered Knowledge
    - Fame and Glory
    - Debauchery
    - Good Accomplished
*** Skills
When you make a hireling, distribute points among one or more of these skills.
**** Adept
An adept has at least apprenticed to an arcane expert, but is not powerful in
their own right. They’re the grad students of the arcane world.

/Arcane Assistance/—When an adept aids in the casting of a spell of lower level
than their skill, the spell’s effects have greater range, duration, or potency.
The exact effects depend on the situation and the spell and are up to the GM.
The GM will describe what effects the assist will add before the spell is cast.
The most important feature of casting with an adept is that any negative effects
of the casting are focused on the adept first.
**** Burglar
Burglars are skilled in a variety of areas, most of them illicit or dangerous.
They are good with devices and traps, but not too helpful in the field of
battle.

/Experimental Trap Disarming/—When a burglar leads the way they can detect traps
almost in time. If a trap would be sprung while a burglar is leading the way the
burglar suffers the full effects but the players get +skill against the trap and
add the burglar’s skill to their armor against the trap. Most traps leave a
burglar in need of immediate healing. If the players Make Camp near the trap,
the burglar can disarm it by the time camp is broken.
**** Minstrel
When a smiling face is needed to smooth things over or negotiate a deal a
minstrel is always happy to lend their services for the proper price.

/A Hero’s Welcome/—When you enter a place of food, drink, or entertainment with
a minstrel you will be treated as a friend by everyone present (unless your
actions prove otherwise). You also subtract the minstrel’s skill from all prices
in town.
**** Priest
Priests are the lower ranking clergy of a religion, performing minor offices and
regular sacraments. While not granted spells themselves, they are able to call
upon their deity for minor aid.

/Ministry/—When you make camp with a priest if you would normally heal you heal
+skill HP.

/First Aid/—When a priest staunches your wounds heal 2×skill HP. You take -1
forward as their healing is painful and distracting.
**** Protector
A protector stands between their employer and the blades, fangs, teeth, and
spells that would harm them.

/Sentry/—When a protector stands between you and an attack you increase your
armor against that attack by the defender’s skill, then reduce their skill by 1
until they receive healing or have time to mend.

/Intervene/—When a protector helps you defy danger you may opt to take +1 from
their aid. If you do you cannot get a 10+ result, a 10+ instead counts as a 7–9.
**** Tracker
Trackers know the secrets of following a trail, but they don’t have the
experience with strange creatures and exotic locales that make for a great
hunter.

/Track/—When a tracker is given time to study a trail while Making Camp, when
camp is broken they can follow the trail to the next major change in terrain,
travel, or weather.

/Guide/—When a tracker leads the way you automatically succeed on any Perilous
Journey of a distance (in rations) lower than the tracker’s skill.
**** Warrior
Warriors are not masters of combat, but they are handy with a weapon.

/Man-at-arms/—When you deal damage while a warrior aids you add their skill to
the damage done. If your attack results in consequences (like a counter attack)
the man-at-arms takes the brunt of it.
** The Adventurer’s Life
Now you know the basics. It’s time you found out what the adventurer’s life is
really like. They say it’s all gold and glory. That’s sometimes true, but
sometimes it also means digging through otyugh waste for a chance at one more
gold coin.
*** Dungeons
As an adventurer you’ll spend a lot of time in dungeons. The word “dungeon”
conjures up an image of the stony halls under a castle where prisoners are kept,
but a dungeon is really any place filled with danger and opportunity. A dragon’s
cave, an enemy camp, a forgotten sewer, a sky castle, the very foundations of
the world.

The most important thing to remember when you’re in a dungeon is that it’s a
living place. Just because you cleared the guards out of the entryway doesn’t
mean they won’t be replaced by fresh recruits. Every monster, soldier, or leader
you kill has friends, mates, followers, and spawn somewhere. Don’t count on
anything in a dungeon.

Since dungeons are living places you’d better prepare for the long haul. Rations
are your best friend. Delving into the Hall of Xa’th’al isn’t a day trip. Once
you’re inside your exit might be blocked. Even if you could just waltz out the
time you spend doing it just gives your enemies time to prepare. Those goblins
aren’t tough, but when they have time to rally and prepare traps…

Speaking of traps—keep your eyes open for them, too. The thief is your best
friend there. They can stop you before you wander into a pit trap or fill the
room with acid. Without one you’re not in dire trouble, but you’re likely to
need to take your time and be extra careful. You can investigate an area by
discerning realities, but you’ll be taking more risks than a skilled thief
would.

When you’re unlucky enough to trigger a trap you might have a chance to get out
of the way, throw up a quick protective spell, or save a friend—most likely by
defying danger. Of course not every trap is so crude as to give you time to get
out of the way. A well-built trap will have a blade in your side before you even
know it’s sprung.

That sounds grim, sure, but it’s not as bad as all that. You’ve got steel,
skills, and spells. If you stick together and keep your wits you’ll make it out
alive. Probably.
*** Monsters
The beasts and worse that fill dungeons? We call them monsters.

Not all of them appear monstrous. Sometimes it’s just a guy in some armor—no
horns, flames, or wings, nothing. But when that guy wants to kill you, well,
he’s as much a monster as the rest.

Some don’t even need arms and armor. A wily warlock or nefarious noble can stab
you in the back a dozen times with a word or two. Be wary of anyone who can
stroll around a dungeon with nothing but a robe and a staff: there’s a reason
they don’t need a shell of steel.

When it comes to fighting monsters, it’s an even bet: your life versus theirs.
You should know that going into it. If you can avoid it, never fight with even
odds. Unless you have the advantage you’re probably better off working to gain
that advantage than betting your life on a fight. Find their weaknesses, pad
your advantages, and you’ll live long enough to enjoy the spoils.

Fights often mean triggering moves like hack and slash, defend, or volley. Defy
danger comes up pretty often too, and class moves like cast a spell. The best
fight for you is one where you have the drop—since hack and slash is triggered
by attacking in melee, and a defenseless enemy isn’t really in melee, the move
won’t trigger—you’ll just bury a weapon or spell in their back and deal your
damage.

Monsters generally fall into a few types. Humanoids are more or less like
you—orcs, goblins, and so on. Beasts are animals, but not so docile as Bessie
the cow: think foot-long horns and acid sacs. Constructs are crafted life.
Planar monsters come from beyond this world, from places only dreamed of. The
undead might be the worst of all: that which is dead is damn hard to kill again.

When you find yourself in a fight with a monster you have a few different tricks
up your sleeve that can help you survive. If the monster’s something you might
know about, you could consult your knowledge and spout lore. It never hurts to
take a minute to look around and discern realities, too—there might be something
helpful nearby that you missed. Make sure you understand your class moves and
how they can help you, too. You never know when a move might come in handy in a
new way.
*** Wilderness
There’s dungeons, there’s civilization, and there’s all the stuff in-between:
the wilderness. The line between a forest and a dungeon is thinner than you
might think—have you ever been lost in the night and surrounded by wolves?

Journeys by road are easy. When you’ve got a trail to follow and some modicum of
protection you’re not even making moves—you just consume some rations on the way
and make it to your destination. If it’s a perilous journey though…

On a perilous journey you’ll need a trailblazer, a scout, and a quartermaster.
That means you’ll probably want at least three people when you’re traveling in
dangerous areas. Fewer than three and you’ll be neglecting something—that’s an
invitation for trouble.
*** Friends and Enemies
You’re an adventurer, so people will pay attention to you. Not all of that
attention is going to be positive. You’ll find that, especially once you’re
laden down with ancient treasure, all manner of hangers-on will appear from the
woodwork.

Sure, you can get leverage on these people and parley them to get what you want,
but the way to build a lasting connection is to do right by them. Forcing Duke
Alhoro to give you a castle in return for his daughter will get you the land,
but the reputation that comes along with your shady dealing won’t do you many
favors. Coercion isn’t mind control, so play it nice if you want to make
friends.

Magic, though, that just might be mind control. The morality of it’s debatable
but you can bend someone to your will if you don’t mind tossing their free will
in the corner.

It’s worth keeping track of who’s got your back and who’d sooner stab you in it.
The GM will be doing the same, and the worst enemy is the one you don’t know.
You’re not the only ones in Dungeon World with grand designs.

While you live the adventurer’s life, with no fixed address to give, other folks
are likely to be more settled. Knowing where the blacksmith is that does the
best work, or which town’s inns will put you up free of charge, is a fine thing
indeed.

Keep in mind that not all power is physical. Even if you could take down King
Arlon in a fight you’ll just be inviting retribution from his kin, allies, and
court. Station is its own kind of power apart from magic and might.
*** The World
You’re an adventurer; you’re a big deal. But there are other forces at work too.
The world will go on without you. If you don’t deal with the goblin infestation
in the sewers maybe someone else will. Or maybe the goblins will take over the
city. Do you really want to find out?

A world in motion is a world waiting to be changed. Your choices of who to kill
(or not), where to go, what bargains to make—it all changes the world you’re in.
Changing the world requires acting on it—making moves and pursuing treasure and
exploration. Change comes in many forms, including XP used to level up and gain
new abilities. Those abilities are then used to go back out into the world and
stir things up. It’s a cycle of change and growth for both you and the world you
live in.
* Character Creation
Making Dungeon World characters is quick and easy. You should all create your
first characters together at the beginning of your first session. Character
creation is, just like play, a kind of conversation—everyone should be there for
it.

You may need to make another character during play, if yours gets killed for
example. If so, no worries, the character creation process helps you make a new
character that fits into the group in just a few minutes. All characters, even
replacement characters, start at first level.

Most everything you need to create a character you’ll find on the character
sheets. These steps will walk you through filling out a character sheet.
** 1. Choose a Class
Look over the character classes and choose one that interests you. To start with
everyone chooses a different class; there aren’t two wizards. If two people want
the same class, talk it over like adults and compromise.
I sit down with Paul and Shannon to play a game run by John. I’ve got some cool
ideas for a wizard, so I mention that would be my first choice. No one else was
thinking of playing one, so I take the wizard character sheet.
** 2. Choose a Race
Some classes have race options. Choose one. Your race gives you a special move.
I like the idea of being flexible—having more spells available is always good,
right? I choose Human, since it’ll allow me to pick a cleric spell and cast it
like it was a wizard one. That’ll leave Shannon’s cleric free to keep the
healing magic flowing.
** 3. Choose a Name
Choose your character’s name from the list.
Avon sounds good.
** 4. Choose Look
Your look is your physical appearance. Choose one item from each list.
Haunted eyes sound good since every wizard has seen some things no mortal was
meant to. No good wizard has time for hair styling so wild hair it is. My robes
are strange, and I mention to everyone that I think maybe they came from Beyond
as part of a summoning ritual. No time to eat with all that studying and
research: thin body.
** 5. Choose Stats
Assign these scores to your stats: 16, 15, 13, 12, 9, 8. Start by looking over
the basic moves and the starting moves for your class. Pick out the move that
interests you the most: something you’ll be doing a lot, or something that you
excel at. Put a 16 in the stat for that move. Look over the list again and pick
out the next most important move to your character, maybe something that
supports your first choice. Put your 15 in the stat for that move. Repeat this
process for your remaining scores: 13, 12, 9, 8.
It looks like I need Intelligence to cast spells, which are my thing, so my 16
goes there. The defy danger option for Dexterity looks like something I might be
doing to dive out of the way of a spell, so that gets my 15. A 13 Wisdom will
help me notice important details (and maybe keep my sanity, based on the defy
danger move). Charisma might be useful in dealing with summoned creatures so
I’ll put my 12 there. Living is always nice, so I put my 9 in Constitution for
some extra HP. Strength gets the 8.
** 6. Figure Out Modifiers
Next you need to figure out the modifiers for your stats. The modifiers are what
you use when a move says +DEX or +CHA. If you’re using the standard character
sheets the modifiers are already listed with each score.
ScoreModifier1–3-34–5-26–8-19–12013–15+116–17+218+3
** 7. Set Maximum HP
Your maximum HP is equal to your class’s base HP+Constitution score. You start
with your maximum HP.
Base 4 plus 9 con gives me a whopping 13 HP.
** 8. Choose Starting Moves
The front side of each character sheet lists the starting moves. Some classes,
like the fighter, have choices to make as part of one of their moves. Make these
choices now. The wizard will need to choose spells for their spellbook. Both the
cleric and the wizard will need to choose which spells they have prepared to
start with.
A /Summoning/ spell is an easy choice, so I take Contact Spirits. Magic Missile
will allow me to deal more damage than the pitiful d4 for the wizard class, so
that’s in too. I choose Alarm for my last spell, since I can think of some
interesting uses for it.
** 9. Choose Alignment
Your alignment is a few words that describe your character’s moral outlook. Each
class may only start with certain alignments. Choose your alignment—in play,
it’ll give your character certain actions that can earn you additional XP
The Neutral option for wizards says I earn extra XP when I discover a magical
mystery. Avon is all about discovering mystery—I’ll go with Neutral.
** 10. Choose Gear
Each class has choices to make for starting gear. Keep your load in mind—it
limits how much you can easily carry. Make sure to total up your armor and note
it on your character sheet.
I’m worried about my HP, so I take armor over books. A dagger sounds about right
for rituals; I choose that over a staff. It’s a toss-up between the healing
potion and the antitoxin, but healing wins out. I also end up with some rations.
** 11. Introduce Your Character
Now that you know who your character is, it’s time to introduce them to everyone
else. Wait until everyone’s finished choosing their name. Then go around the
table; when it’s your turn, share your look, class and anything else pertinent
about your character. You can share your alignment now or keep it a secret if
you prefer.

This is also the time for the GM to ask questions. The GM’s questions should
help establish the relationships between characters (“What do you think about
that?”) and draw the group into the adventure (“Does that mean you’ve met
Grundloch before?”). The GM should listen to everything in the description and
ask about anything that stands out. Establish where they’re from, who they are,
how they came together, or anything else that seems relevant or interesting.
“This is Avon, mighty wizard! He’s a human with haunted eyes, wild hair, strange
robes, and a thin body. Like I mentioned before his robes are strange because
they’re literally not of this world: they came to him as part of a summoning
ritual.”
** 12. Choose Bonds
Once everyone has described their characters you can choose your bonds. You must
fill in one bond but it’s in your best interest to fill in more. For each blank
fill in the name of one character. You can use the same character for more than
one statement.

Take some time to discuss the bonds and let the GM ask questions about them as
they come up. You’ll want to go back and forth and make sure everyone is happy
and comfortable with how the bonds have come out. Leave space to discover what
each one might mean in play, too: don’t pre-determine everything at the start.
Once everyone’s filled in their bonds read them out to the group. When a move
has you roll+Bond you’ll count the number of bonds you have with the character
in question and add that to the roll.
With everyone introduced I choose which character to list in each bond, I have
Paul’s fighter Gregor and Shannon’s cleric Brinton to choose from. The bond
about prophecy sounds fun, so I choose Gregor for it and end up with “Gregor
will play an important role in the events to come. I have foreseen it!” It seems
like the wizard who contacts Things From Beyond and the cleric might not see eye
to eye, so I add Shannon’s character and get “Brinton is woefully misinformed
about the world; I will teach them all that I can.” I leave my last bond blank;
I’ll deal with it later. Once everyone is done I read my bonds aloud and we all
discuss what this means about why we’re together and where we’re going.
** 13. Get Ready to Play
Take a little break: grab a drink, stretch your legs and let the GM brainstorm
for a little bit about what they’ve learned about your characters. Once you’re
all ready, grab your dice and your sheet and get ready to take on the dungeon.

Once you’re ready the GM will get things started as described in the First
Session chapter.

* Basic Moves
** Hack and Slash
When you *attack an enemy in melee*, roll+Str. On a 10+ you deal your damage to
the enemy and avoid their attack. At your option, you may choose to do +1d6
damage but expose yourself to the enemy’s attack. On a 7–9, you deal your damage
to the enemy and the enemy makes an attack against you.
** Volley
When you *take aim and shoot at an enemy at range*, roll+Dex. On a 10+ you have
a clear shot—deal your damage. On a 7–9, choose one (whichever you choose you
deal your damage):
    - You have to move to get the shot placing you in danger of the GM’s choice
    - You have to take what you can get: -1d6 damage
    - You have to take several shots, reducing your ammo by one.
** Defy Danger
When you *act despite an imminent threat* or *suffer a calamity*, say how you
deal with it and roll. If you do it…
    - …by powering through, +Str
    - …by getting out of the way or acting fast, +Dex
    - …by enduring, +Con
    - …with quick thinking, +Int
    - …through mental fortitude, +Wis
    - …using charm and social grace, +Cha
On a 10+, you do what you set out to, the threat doesn’t come to bear. On a 7–9,
you stumble, hesitate, or flinch: the GM will offer you a worse outcome, hard
bargain, or ugly choice.
** Defend
When you *stand in defense of a person, item, or location* under attack,
roll+Con. On a 10+, hold 3. On a 7–9, hold 1. So long as you stand in defense,
when you or the thing you defend is attacked you may spend hold, 1 for 1, to
choose an option:
    - Redirect an attack from the thing you defend to yourself
    - Halve the attack’s effect or damage
    - Open up the attacker to an ally giving that ally +1 forward against the
      attacker
    - Deal damage to the attacker equal to your level
** Spout Lore
When you *consult your accumulated knowledge about something*, roll+Int. On a
10+ the GM will tell you something interesting and useful about the subject
relevant to your situation. On a 7–9 the GM will only tell you something
interesting—it’s on you to make it useful. The GM might ask you “How do you know
this?” Tell them the truth, now.
** Discern Realities
When you *closely study a situation or person*, roll+Wis. On a 10+ ask the GM 3
questions from the list below. On a 7–9 ask 1. Take +1 forward when acting on
the answers.
    - What happened here recently?
    - What is about to happen?
    - What should I be on the lookout for?
    - What here is useful or valuable to me?
    - Who’s really in control here?
    - What here is not what it appears to be?
** Parley
When you *have leverage on a GM character and manipulate them*, roll+Cha.
Leverage is something they need or want. On a hit they ask you for something and
do it if you make them a promise first. On a 7–9, they need some concrete
assurance of your promise, right now.
** Aid or Interfere
When you *help or hinder someone you have a bond with*, roll+Bond with them. On
a 10+ they take +1 or -2, your choice. On a 7–9 you also expose yourself to
danger, retribution, or cost.
* Special Moves
** Last Breath
When *you’re dying* you catch a glimpse of what lies beyond the Black Gates of
Death’s Kingdom (the GM will describe it). Then roll (just roll, +nothing—yeah,
Death doesn’t care how tough or cool you are). On a 10+ you’ve cheated
death—you’re in a bad spot but you’re still alive. On a 7–9 Death will offer you
a bargain. Take it and stabilize or refuse and pass beyond the Black Gates into
whatever fate awaits you. On a miss, your fate is sealed. You’re marked as
Death’s own and you’ll cross the threshold soon. The GM will tell you when.
** Encumbrance
When you *make a move while carrying weight* up to or equal to load, you’re
fine. When you make a move while carrying weight equal to load+1 or load+2, you
take -1. When you make a move while carrying weight greater than load+2, you
have a choice: drop at least 1 weight and roll at -1, or automatically fail.
** Make Camp
When you *settle in to rest* consume a ration. If you’re somewhere dangerous
decide the watch order as well. If you have enough XP you may Level Up. When you
wake from at least a few uninterrupted hours of sleep heal damage equal to half
your max HP.
** Take Watch
When *you’re on watch and something approaches the camp* roll+Wis. On a 10+
you’re able to wake the camp and prepare a response, the camp takes +1 forward.
On a 7–9 you react just a moment too late; the camp is awake but hasn’t had time
to prepare. You have weapons and armor but little else. On a miss whatever lurks
outside the campfire’s light has the drop on you.
** Undertake a Perilous Journey
When you *travel through hostile territory*, choose one member of the party to
act as trailblazer, one to scout ahead, and one to be quartermaster (the same
character cannot have two jobs). If you don’t have enough party members or
choose not to assign a job, treat that job as if it had rolled a 6. Each
character with a job to do rolls+Wis. On a 10+ the quartermaster reduces the
number of rations required by one. On a 10+ the trailblazer reduces the amount
of time it takes to reach your destination (the GM will say by how much). On a
10+ the scout will spot any trouble quick enough to let you get the drop on it.
On a 7–9 each roles performs their job as expected: the normal number of rations
are consumed, the journey takes about as long as expected, no one gets the drop
on you but you don’t get the drop on them either.
** Level Up
When you *have downtime (hours or days) and XP equal to (or greater than) your
current level + 7*, subtract your current level +7 from your XP, increase your
level by 1, and choose a new advanced move from your class. If you are the
wizard, you also get to add a new spell to your spellbook.

Choose one of your stats and increase it by 1 (this may change your modifier).
Changing your Constitution increases your maximum and current HP. Ability scores
can’t go higher than 18.
** End of Session
When you *reach the end of a session*, choose one your bonds that you feel is
resolved (completely explored, no longer relevant, or otherwise). Ask the player
of the character you have the bond with if they agree. If they do, mark XP and
write a new bond with whomever you wish.

Once bonds have been updated look at your alignment. If you fulfilled that
alignment at least once this session, mark XP. Then answer these three questions
as a group:
    - Did we learn something new and important about the world?
    - Did we overcome a notable monster or enemy?
    - Did we loot a memorable treasure?

For each “yes” answer everyone marks XP.
** Carouse
When you *return triumphant and throw a big party*, spend 100 coin and roll +
extra 100s of coin spent. On a 10+ choose 3. On a 7–9 choose 1. On a miss, you
still choose one, but things get really out of hand.
    - You befriend a useful NPC
    - You hear rumors of an opportunity
    - You gain useful information
    - You are not entangled, ensorcelled, or tricked
** Supply
When you *go to buy something with gold on hand*, if it’s something readily
available in the settlement you’re in, you can buy it at market price. If it’s
something special, beyond what’s usually available here, or non-mundane,
roll+Cha. On a 10+ you find what you’re looking for at a fair price. On a 7–9
you’ll have to pay more or settle for something similar.
** Recover
When you *do nothing but rest in comfort and safety* after a day of rest you
recover all your HP. After three days of rest you remove one debility of your
choice. If you’re under the care of a healer (magical or otherwise) you heal a
debility for every two days of rest instead.
** Recruit
When you *put out word that you’re looking to hire help*, roll. If you make it
known…
    - …that your pay is generous, take +1
    - …what you’re setting out to do, take +1
    - …that they’ll get a share of whatever you find, take +1
If you have a useful reputation around these parts take an additional +1. On a
10+ you’ve got your pick of a number of skilled applicants, your choice who you
hire, no penalty for not taking them along. On a 7–9 you’ll have to settle for
someone close or turn them away. On a miss someone influential and ill-suited
declares they’d like to come along (a foolhardy youth, a loose-cannon, or a
veiled enemy, for example), bring them and take the consequences or turn them
away. If you turn away applicants you take -1 forward to Recruit.
** Outstanding Warrants
When you *return to a civilized place in which you’ve caused trouble before*,
roll+Cha. On a hit, word has spread of your deeds and everyone recognizes you.
On a 7–9, that, and, the GM chooses a complication:
    - The local constabulary has a warrant out for your arrest
    - Someone has put a price on your head
    - Someone important to you has been put in a bad spot as a result of your
      actions
** Bolster
When you *spend your leisure time in study, meditation, or hard practice,* you
gain preparation. If you prepare for a week or two, 1 preparation. If you
prepare for a month or longer, 3 preparation. When your preparation pays off
spend 1 preparation for +1 to any roll. You can only spend one preparation per
roll.

* The Bard
The poems say an adventurer’s life is all open roads and the glory of coin and
combat. The tales told in every farmhand-filled inn have to have some ring of
truth to them, don’t they? The songs to inspire peasantry and royals alike—to
soothe the savage beast or drive men to a frenzy—have to come from somewhere.

Enter the bard. You, with your smooth tongue and quick wit. You teller-of-tales
and singer-of-songs. It takes a mere minstrel to retell a thing but a true bard
to live it. Strap on your boots, noble orator. Sharpen that hidden dagger and
take up the call. Someone’s got to be there, fighting shoulder-to-shoulder with
the goons and the thugs and the soon-to-be-heroes. Who better than you to write
the tale of your own heroism?

Nobody. Get going.
** Names
/Elf/: Astrafel, Daelwyn, Feliana, Damarra, Sistranalle, Pendrell, Melliandre,
Dagoliir
/Human/: Baldric, Leena, Dunwick, Willem, Edwyn, Florian, Seraphine, Quorra,
Charlotte, Lily, Ramonde, Cassandra
** Look
Choose one for each:
Knowing Eyes, Fiery Eyes, or Joyous Eyes
Fancy Hair, Wild Hair, or Stylish Cap
Finery, Traveling Clothes, or Poor Clothes
Fit Body, Well-fed Body, or Thin Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 6+Constitution.
Your base damage is d6.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Elf
When you enter an important location (your call) you can ask the GM for one fact
from the history of that location.
*** Human
When you first enter a civilized settlement someone who respects the custom of
hospitality to minstrels will take you in as their guest.
You start with these moves:
*** Arcane Art
When you *weave a performance into a basic spell*, choose an ally and an effect:
    - Heal 1d8 damage
    - +1d4 forward to damage
    - Their mind is shaken clear of one enchantment
    - The next time someone successfully assists the target with aid, they get
      +2 instead of +1
Then roll+Cha. ✴On a 10+, the ally gets the selected effect. ✴On a 7-9, your
spell still works, but you draw unwanted attention or your magic reverberates to
other targets affecting them as well, GM’s choice.
*** Bardic Lore
Choose an area of expertise:
    - Spells and Magicks
    - The Dead and Undead
    - Grand Histories of the Known World
    - A Bestiary of Creatures Unusual
    - The Planar Spheres
    - Legends of Heroes Past
    - Gods and Their Servants
When you *first encounter an important creature, location, or item (your call)
covered by your bardic lore* you can ask the GM any one question about it; the
GM will answer truthfully. The GM may then ask you what tale, song, or legend
you heard that information in.
*** Charming and Open
When you *speak frankly with someone*, you can ask their player a question from
the list below. They must answer it truthfully, then they may ask you a question
from the list (which you must answer truthfully).
    - Whom do you serve?
    - What do you wish I would do?
    - How can I get you to ______?
    - What are you really feeling right now?
    - What do you most desire?
*** A Port in the Storm
When you *return to a civilized settlement you’ve visited before*, tell the GM
when you were last here. They’ll tell you how it’s changed since then.
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Good
Perform your art to aid someone else.
*** Neutral
Avoid a conflict or defuse a tense situation.
*** Chaotic
Spur others to significant and unplanned decisive action.
** Gear
Your load is 9+Str. You have dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight). Choose one
instrument, all are 0 weight for you:
    - Your father’s mandolin, repaired
    - A fine lute, a gift from a noble
    - The pipes with which you courted your first love
    - A stolen horn
    - A fiddle, never before played
    - A songbook in a forgotten tongue
Choose your clothing:
    - Leather armor (1 armor, 1 weight)
    - Ostentatious clothes (0 weight)
Choose your armament:
    - Dueling rapier (close, precise, 2 weight)
    - Worn bow (near, 2 weight), bundle of arrows (3 ammo, 1 weight), and short
      sword (close, 1 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight)
    - Bandages (0 weight)
    - Halfling pipeleaf (0 weight)
    - 3 coins
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

This is not my first adventure with _______________.

I sang stories of _______________ long before I ever met them in person.

_______________ is often the butt of my jokes.

I am writing a ballad about the adventures of _______________.

_______________ trusted me with a secret.

_______________ does not trust me, and for good reason.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2-5, choose from these moves.
*** Healing Song
When you *heal with arcane art*, you heal +1d8 damage.
*** Vicious Cacophony
When you *grant bonus damage with arcane art*, you grant an extra +1d4 damage.
*** It Goes To Eleven
When you *unleash a crazed performance* (a righteous lute solo or mighty brass
blast, maybe) choose a target who can hear you and roll+Cha. ✴On a 10+ the
target attacks their nearest ally in range. ✴On a 7–9 they attack their nearest
ally, but you also draw their attention and ire.
*** Metal Hurlant
When you *shout with great force or play a shattering note* choose a target and
roll+Con. ✴On a 10+ the target takes 1d10 damage and is deafened for a few
minutes. ✴On a 7–9 you still damage your target, but it’s out of control: the GM
will choose an additional target nearby.
*** A Little Help From My Friends
When you *successfully aid someone* you take +1 forward as well.
*** Eldritch Tones
Your arcane art is strong, allowing you to choose two effects instead of one.
*** Duelist’s Parry
When you hack and slash, you take +1 armor forward.
*** Bamboozle
When you *parley with someone*, on a 7+ you also take +1 forward with them.
*** Multiclass Dabbler
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
*** Multiclass Initiate
Requires: Multiclass Dabbler
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
When you gain a level from 6-10, choose from these moves or the level 2-5 moves.
*** Healing Chorus
Replaces: Healing Song
When you *heal with arcane art*, you heal +2d8 damage.
*** Vicious Blast
Replaces: Vicious Cacophony
When you *grant bonus damage with arcane art*, you grant an extra +2d4 damage.
*** Unforgettable Face
When you *meet someone you’ve met before* (your call) after some time apart you
take +1 forward against them.
*** Reputation
When you *first meet someone who’s heard songs about you*, roll+Cha. ✴On a 10+,
tell the GM two things they’ve heard about you. ✴On a 7-9, tell the GM one thing
they’ve heard, and the GM tells you one thing.
*** Eldritch Chord
Replaces: Eldritch Tones
When you use arcane art, you choose two effects. You also get to choose one of
those effects to double.
*** An Ear For Magic
When you *hear an enemy cast a spell* the GM will tell you the name of the spell
and its effects. Take +1 forward when acting on the answers.
*** Devious
When you use charming and open you may also ask “How are you vulnerable to me?”
Your subject may not ask this question of you.
*** Duelist’s Block
Replaces: Duelist’s Parry
When you hack and slash, you take +2 armor forward.
*** Con
Replaces: Bamboozle
When you *parley with someone*, on a 7+ you also take +1 forward with them and
get to ask their player one question which they must answer truthfully.
*** Multiclass Master
Requires: Multiclass Initiate
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
* The Cleric
The lands of Dungeon World are a gods-forsaken mess. They’re lousy with the
walking dead, beasts of all sorts, and the vast unnatural spaces between safe
and temple-blessed civilizations. It is a godless world out there. That’s why it
needs you.

Bringing the glory of your god to the heathens isn’t just in your nature—it’s
your calling. It falls to you to proselytize with sword and mace and spell. To
cleave deep into the witless heart of the wilds and plant the seed of divinity
there. Some say that it is best to keep god close to your heart. You know that’s
rubbish. God lives at the edge of a blade.

Show the world who is lord.
** Names
/Dwarf/: Durga, Aelfar, Gerda, Rurgosh, Bjorn, Drummond, Helga, Siggrun, Freya
/Human/: Wesley, Brinton, Jon, Sara, Hawthorn, Elise, Clarke, Lenore, Piotr,
Dahlia, Carmine
** Look
Choose one for each:
Kind Eyes, Sharp Eyes, or Sad Eyes
Tonsure, Strange Hair, or Bald
Flowing Robes, Habit, or Common Garb
Thin Body, Knobby Body, or Flabby Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 8+Constitution.
Your base damage is d6.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Dwarf
You are one with stone. When you commune you are also granted a special version
of Words of the Unspeaking as a rote which only works on stone.
*** Human
Your faith is diverse. Choose one wizard spell. You can cast and be granted that
spell as if it was a cleric spell.
You start with these moves:
*** Deity
You serve and worship some deity or power which grants you spells. Give your god
a name (maybe Helferth, Sucellus, Zorica or Krugon the Bleak) and choose your
deity’s domain:
    - Healing and Restoration
    - Bloody Conquest
    - Civilization
    - Knowledge and Hidden Things
    - The Downtrodden and Forgotten
    - What Lies Beneath
Choose one precept of your religion:
    - Your religion preaches the sanctity of suffering, add Petition: Suffering
    - Your religion is cultish and insular, add Petition: Gaining Secrets
    - Your religion has important sacrificial rites, add Petition: Offering
    - Your religion believes in trial by combat, add Petition: Personal Victory
*** Divine Guidance
When you *petition your deity according to the precept of your religion*, you
are granted some useful knowledge or boon related to your deity’s domain. The GM
will tell you what.
*** Turn Undead
When you *hold your holy symbol aloft and call on your deity for protection*,
roll+Wis. ✴On a 7+, so long as you continue to pray and brandish your holy
symbol, no undead may come within reach of you. ✴On a 10+, you also momentarily
daze intelligent undead and cause mindless undead to flee. Aggression breaks the
effects and they are able to act as normal. Intelligent undead may still find
ways to harry you from afar. They’re clever like that.
*** Commune
When you *spend uninterrupted time (an hour or so) in quiet communion with your
deity*, you:
    - Lose any spells already granted to you.
    - Are granted new spells of your choice whose total levels don’t exceed your
      own level+1, and none of which is a higher level than your own level.
    - Prepare all of your rotes, which never count against your limit.
*** Cast a Spell
When you *unleash a spell granted to you by your deity*, roll+Wis. ✴On a 10+,
the spell is successfully cast and your deity does not revoke the spell, so you
may cast it again. ✴On a 7–9, the spell is cast, but choose one:
    - You draw unwelcome attention or put yourself in a spot. The GM will tell
      you how.
    - Your casting distances you from your deity—take -1 ongoing to cast a spell
      until the next time you commune.
    - After you cast it, the spell is revoked by your deity. You cannot cast the
      spell again until you commune and have it granted to you.
Note that maintaining spells with ongoing effects will sometimes cause a penalty
to your roll to cast a spell.
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Good
Endanger yourself to heal another.
*** Lawful
Endanger yourself following the precepts of your church or god.
*** Evil
Harm another to prove the superiority of your church or god.
** Gear
Your load is 10+Str. You carry dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight) and some
symbol of the divine, describe it (0 weight). Choose your defenses:
    - Chainmail (1 armor, 1 weight)
    - Shield (+1 armor, 2 weight)
Choose your armament:
    - Warhammer (close, 1 weight)
    - Mace (close, 1 weight)
    - Staff (close, two-handed, 1 weight) and bandages (0 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight) and dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight)
    - Healing potion (0 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

_______________ has insulted my deity; I do not trust them.

_______________ is a good and faithful person; I trust them implicitly.

_______________ is in constant danger, I will keep them safe.

I am working on converting _______________ to my faith.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2–5, choose from these moves.
*** Chosen One
Choose one spell. You are granted that spell as if it was one level lower.
*** Invigorate
When you *heal someone* they take +2 forward to their damage.
*** The Scales of Life and Death
When *someone takes their last breath in your presence*, they take +1 to the
roll.
*** Serenity
When you cast a spell you ignore the first -1 penalty from ongoing spells.
*** First Aid
Cure Light Wounds is a rote for you, and therefore doesn’t count against your
limit of granted spells.
*** Divine Intervention
When you commune you get 1 hold and lose any hold you already had. Spend that
hold when you or an ally takes damage to call on your deity, they intervene with
an appropriate manifestation (a sudden gust of wind, a lucky slip, a burst of
light) and negate the damage.
*** Penitent
When you *take damage and embrace the pain*, you may take +1d4 damage (ignoring
armor). If you do, take +1 forward to cast a spell.
*** Empower
When you cast a spell, on a 10+ you have the option of choosing from the 7–9
list. If you do, you may choose one of these effects as well:
    - The spell’s effects are doubled
    - The spell’s targets are doubled
*** Orison for Guidance
When you *sacrifice something of value to your deity and pray for guidance*,
your deity tells you what it would have you do. If you do it, mark experience.
*** Divine Protection
When you wear no armor or shield you get 2 armor.
*** Devoted Healer
When you heal someone else of damage, add your level to the amount of damage
healed.
When you gain a level from 6–10, choose from these moves or the level 2–5 moves.
*** Anointed
Requires: Chosen One
Choose one spell in addition to the one you picked for chosen one. You are
granted that spell as if it was one level lower.
*** Apotheosis
The first time you *spend time in prayer as appropriate to your god* after
taking this move, choose a feature associated with your deity (rending claws,
wings of sapphire feathers, an all-seeing third eye, etc.). When you emerge from
prayer, you permanently gain that physical feature.
*** Reaper
When you *take time after a conflict to dedicate your victory to your deity and
deal with the dead*, take +1 forward.
*** Providence
Replaces: Serenity
You ignore the -1 penalty from two spells you maintain.
*** Greater First Aid
Requires: First Aid
Cure Moderate Wounds is a rote for you, and therefore doesn’t count against your
limit of granted spells.
*** Divine Invincibility
Replaces: Divine Intervention
When you commune you gain 2 hold and lose any hold you already had. Spend that
hold when you or an ally takes damage to call on your deity, who intervenes with
an appropriate manifestation (a sudden gust of wind, a lucky slip, a burst of
light) and negates the damage.
*** Martyr
Replaces: Penitent
When you *take damage and embrace the pain*, you may take +1d4 damage (ignoring
armor). If you do, take +1 forward to cast a spell and add your level to any
damage done or healed by the spell.
*** Divine Armor
Replaces: Divine Protection
When you wear no armor or shield you get 3 armor.
*** Greater Empower
Replaces: Empower
When you cast a spell, on a 10–11 you have the option of choosing from the 7–9
list. If you do, you may choose one of these effects as well. On a 12+ you get
to choose one of these effects for free.
    - The spell’s effects are doubled
    - The spell’s targets are doubled
*** Multiclass Dabbler
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
* Cleric Spells
** Rotes
Every time you commune, you gain access to all of your rotes without having to
select them or count them toward your allotment of spells.
*Light* Rote
An item you touch glows with divine light, about as bright as a torch. It gives
off no heat or sound and requires no fuel but is otherwise like a mundane torch.
You have complete control of the color of the flame. The spell lasts as long as
it is in your presence.
*Sanctify* Rote
Food or water you hold in your hands while you cast this spell is consecrated by
your deity. In addition to now being holy or unholy, the affected substance is
purified of any mundane spoilage.
*Guidance* Rote
The symbol of your deity appears before you and gestures towards the direction
or course of action your deity would have you take then disappears. The message
is through gesture only; your communication through this spell is severely
limited.
** Level 1 Spells
*Bless* Level 1 /Ongoing/
Your deity smiles upon a combatant of your choice. They take +1 ongoing so long
as battle continues and they stand and fight. While this spell is ongoing you
take -1 to cast a spell.
*Cure Light Wounds* Level 1
At your touch wounds scab and bones cease to ache. Heal an ally you touch of 1d8
damage.
*Detect Alignment* Level 1
When you cast this spell choose an alignment: Good, Evil, Lawful, or Chaotic.
One of your senses is briefly able to detect that alignment. The GM will tell
you what here is of that alignment.
*Cause Fear* Level 1 /Ongoing/
Choose a target you can see and a nearby object. The target is afraid of the
object so long as you maintain the spell. Their reaction is up to them: flee,
panic, beg, fight. While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell. You
cannot target entities with less than animal intelligence (magical constructs,
undead, automatons, and the like).
*Magic Weapon* Level 1 /Ongoing/
The weapon you hold while casting does +1d4 damage until you dismiss this spell.
While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Sanctuary* Level 1
As you cast this spell, you walk the perimeter of an area, consecrating it to
your deity. As long as you stay within that area you are alerted whenever
someone acts with malice within the sanctuary (including entering with harmful
intent). Anyone who receives healing within a sanctuary heals +1d4 HP.
*Speak With Dead* Level 1
A corpse converses with you briefly. It will answer any three questions you pose
to it to the best of the knowledge it had in life and the knowledge it gained in
death.
** Level 3 Spells
*Animate Dead* Level 3 /Ongoing/
You invoke a hungry spirit to possess a recently-dead body and serve you. This
creates a zombie that follows your orders to the best of its limited abilities.
Treat the zombie as a character, but with access to only the basic moves. It has
a +1 modifier for all stats and 1 HP. The zombie also gets your choice of 1d4 of
these traits:
    - It’s talented. Give one stat a +2 modifier.
    - It’s durable. It has +2 HP for each level you have.
    - It has a functioning brain and can complete complex tasks.
    - It does not appear obviously dead, at least for a day or two.
The zombie lasts until it is destroyed by taking damage in excess of its HP, or
until you end the spell. While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a
spell.
*Cure Moderate Wounds* Level 3
You staunch bleeding and set bones through magic. Heal an ally you touch of 2d8
damage.
*Darkness* Level 3 /Ongoing/
Choose an area you can see: it’s filled with supernatural darkness and shadow.
While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Resurrection* Level 3
Tell the GM you would like to resurrect a corpse whose soul has not yet fully
departed this world. Resurrection is always possible, but the GM will give you
one or more (possibly all) of these conditions to fulfill:
    - It’s going to take days/weeks/months
    - You must get help from ____
    - It will require a lot of money
    - You must sacrifice ____ to do it
The GM may, depending on the circumstances, allow you to resurrect the corpse
now, with the understanding that the conditions must be met before it’s
permanent, or require you to meet the conditions before the corpse is
resurrected.
*Hold Person* Level 3
Choose a person you can see. Until you cast a spell or leave their presence they
cannot act except to speak. This effect ends immediately if the target takes
damage from any source.
** Level 5 Spells
*Revelation* Level 5
Your deity answers your prayers with a moment of perfect understanding. The GM
will shed light on the current situation. When acting on the information, you
take +1 forward.
*Cure Critical Wounds* Level 5
Heal an ally you touch of 3d8 damage.
*Divination* Level 5
Name a person, place, or thing you want to learn about. Your deity grants you
visions of the target, as clear as if you were there.
*Contagion* Level 5 /Ongoing/
Choose a creature you can see. Until you end this spell, the target suffers from
a disease of your choice. While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a
spell.
*Words of the Unspeaking* Level 5
With a touch you speak to the spirits within things. The non-living object you
touch answers three questions you pose, as best it can.
*True Seeing* Level 5 /Ongoing/
Your vision is opened to the true nature of everything you lay your eyes on. You
pierce illusions and see things that have been hidden. The GM will describe the
area before you ignoring any illusions and falsehoods, magical or otherwise.
While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Trap Soul* Level 5
You trap the soul of a dying creature within a gem. The trapped creature is
aware of its imprisonment but can still be manipulated through spells, parley,
and other effects. All moves against the trapped creature are at +1. You can
free the soul at any time but it can never be recaptured once freed.
** Level 7 Spells
*Word of Recall* Level 7
Choose a word. The first time after casting this spell that you speak the chosen
word, you and any allies touching you when you cast the spell are immediately
returned to the exact spot where you cast the spell. You can only maintain a
single location; casting Word of Recall again before speaking the word replaces
the earlier spell.
*Heal* Level 7
Touch an ally and you may heal their damage a number of points up to your
maximum HP.
*Harm* Level 7
Touch an enemy and strike them with divine wrath—deal 2d8 damage to them and 1d6
damage to yourself. This damage ignores armor.
*Sever* Level 7 /Ongoing/
Choose an appendage on the target such as an arm, tentacle, or wing. The
appendage is magically severed from their body, causing no damage but
considerable pain. Missing an appendage may, for example, keep a winged creature
from flying, or a bull from goring you on its horns. While this spell is ongoing
you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Mark of Death* Level 7
Choose a creature whose true name you know. This spell creates permanent runes
on a target surface that will kill that creature, should they read them.
*Control Weather* Level 7
Pray for rain—or sun, wind, or snow. Within a day or so, your god will answer.
The weather will change according to your will and last a handful of days.
** Level 9 Spells
*Storm of Vengeance* Level 9
Your deity brings the unnatural weather of your choice to pass. Rain of blood or
acid, clouds of souls, wind that can carry away buildings, or any other weather
you can imagine: ask and it shall come.
*Repair* Level 9
Choose one event in the target’s past. All effects of that event, including
damage, poison, disease, and magical effects, are ended and repaired. HP and
diseases are healed, poisons are neutralized, magical effects are ended.
*Divine Presence* Level 9 /Ongoing/
Every creature must ask your leave to enter your presence, and you must give
permission aloud for them to enter. Any creature without your leave takes an
extra 1d10 damage whenever they take damage in your presence. While this spell
is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Consume Unlife* Level 9
The mindless undead creature you touch is destroyed and you steal its death
energy to heal yourself or the next ally you touch. The amount of damage healed
is equal to the HP that the creature had remaining before you destroyed it.
*Plague* Level 9 /Ongoing/
Name a city, town, encampment, or other place where people live. As long as this
spell is active that place is beset by a plague appropriate to your deity’s
domains (locusts, death of the first born, etc.) While this spell is ongoing you
take -1 to cast a spell.
* The Druid
Cast your eyes around the fire. What has brought you to these people, stinking
of the dust and sweat of the city? Perhaps it is a kindness—do you protect them
as the mother bear watches over her cubs? Are they your pack, now? Strange
brothers and sisters you have. Whatever your inspiration, they would certainly
fail without your sharp senses and sharper claws.

You are of the sacred spaces; you are born of soil and wear the marks of her
spirits on your skin. You may have had a life before, maybe you were a city
dweller like them, but not now. You’ve given up that static shape. Listen to
your allies pray to their carved stone gods and polish their silver shells. They
speak of the glory they’ll find back in that festering town you left behind.

Their gods are children, their steel is false protection. You walk the old ways,
you wear the pelts of the earth itself. You’ll take your share of the treasure,
but will you ever walk as one of them? Only time will tell.
** Names
/Elf/: Hycorax, Ethanwe, Sinathel, Demanor, Menoliir, Mithralan, Taeros, Aegor
/Halfling/: Tanner, Dunstan, Rose, Ivy, Robard, Mab, Thistle, Puck, Anne, Serah
/Human/: Elana, Obelis, Herran, Syla, Andanna, Siobhan, Aziz, Pelin, Sibel,
Nils, Wei
** Look
Choose one for each:
Wise Eyes, Wild Eyes, or Haunting Eyes
Furry Hood, Messy Hair, or Braided Hair
Ceremonial Garb, Practical Leathers, or Weathered Hides
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 6+Constitution.
Your base damage is d6.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Elf
The sap of the elder trees flows within you. In addition to any other
attunements, the Great Forest is always considered your land.
*** Human
As your people learned to bind animals to field and farm, so too are you bound
to them. You may always take the shape of any domesticated animal, in addition
to your normal options.
*** Halfling
You sing the healing songs of spring and brook. When you make camp, you and your
allies heal +1d6.
You start with these moves:
*** Born of the Soil
You learned your magic in a place whose spirits are strong and ancient and
they’ve marked you as one of their own. No matter where you go, they live within
you and allow you to take their shape. Choose one of the following. It is the
land to which you are attuned—when shapeshifting you may take the shape of any
animal who might live in your Land.
    - The Great Forests
    - The Whispering Plains
    - The Vast Desert
    - The Stinking Mire
    - The River Delta
    - The Depths of the Earth
    - The Sapphire Islands
    - The Open Sea
    - The Towering Mountains
    - The Frozen North
    - The Blasted Wasteland
Chose a tell—a physical attribute that marks you as born of the soil—that
reflects the spirit of your land. It may be an animal feature like antlers or
leopard’s spots or something more general: hair like leaves or eyes of
glittering crystal. Your tell remains no matter what shape you take.
*** By Nature Sustained
You don’t need to eat or drink. If a move tells you to mark off a ration just
ignore it.
*** Spirit Tongue
The grunts, barks, chirps, and calls of the creatures of the wild are as
language to you. You can understand any animal native to your land or akin to
one whose essence you have studied.
*** Shapeshifter
When you call upon the spirits to change your shape, roll+Wis. ✴On a 10+ hold 3.
✴On a 7–9 hold 2. ✴On a miss hold 1 in addition to whatever the GM says.

You may take on the physical form of any species whose essence you have studied
or who lives in your land: you and your possessions meld into a perfect copy of
the species’ form. You have any innate abilities and weaknesses of the form:
claws, wings, gills, breathing water instead of air. You still use your normal
stats but some moves may be harder to trigger—a housecat will find it hard to do
battle with an ogre. The GM will also tell you one or more moves associated with
your new form. Spend 1 hold to make that move. Once you’re out of hold, you
return to your natural form. At any time, you may spend all your hold and revert
to your natural form.
*** Studied Essence
When you *spend time in contemplation of an animal spirit*, you may add its
species to those you can assume using shapeshifting.
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Chaotic
Destroy a symbol of civilization.
*** Good
Help something or someone grow.
*** Neutral
Eliminate an unnatural menace.
** Gear
Your load is 6+Str. You carry some token of your land, describe it. Choose your
defenses:
    - Hide armor (1 armor, 1 weight)
    - Wooden shield (+1 armor, 1 weight)
Choose your armament:
    - Shillelagh (close, 2 weight)
    - Staff (close, two-handed, 1 weight)
    - Spear (close, thrown, near, 1 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight)
    - Poultices and herbs (2 uses, 1 weight)
    - Halfling pipeleaf (0 weight)
    - 3 antitoxin (0 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

____________________ smells more like prey than a hunter.

The spirits spoke to me of a great danger that follows ______________.

I have showed ________________ a secret rite of the Land.

___________ has tasted my blood and I theirs. We are bound by it.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2–5, choose from these moves.
*** Hunter’s Brother
Choose one move from the ranger class list.
*** Red of Tooth and Claw
When you *are in an appropriate animal form* (something dangerous) increase your
damage to d8.
*** Communion of Whispers
When *you spend time in a place, making note of its resident spirits and calling
on the spirits of the land*, roll+Wis. You will be granted a vision of
significance to you, your allies, and the spirits around you. ✴On a 10+ the
vision will be clear and helpful to you. ✴On a 7–9 the vision is unclear, its
meaning murky. ✴On a miss, the vision is upsetting, frightening, or
traumatizing. The GM will describe it. Take -1 forward.
*** Barkskin
So long as your feet touch the ground you have +1 armor.
*** Eyes of the Tiger
When you mark an animal (with mud, dirt, or blood) you can see through that
animal’s eyes as if they were your own, no matter what distance separates you.
Only one animal at a time may be marked in this way.
*** Shed
When you *take damage while shapeshifted* you may choose to revert to your
natural form to negate the damage.
*** Thing-Talker
You see the spirits in the sand, the sea and the stone. You may now apply your
spirit tongue, shapeshifting and studied essence to inanimate natural objects
(plants and rocks) or creatures made thereof, as well as animals. Thing-talker
forms can be exact copies or can be mobile vaguely humanoid-shaped entities.
*** Formcrafter
When you shapeshift choose a stat: you take +1 ongoing to rolls using that stat
while shifted. The GM will choose a stat, too: you take -1 ongoing to rolls
using that stat while shifted.
*** Elemental Mastery
When you *call on the primal spirits of fire, water, earth or air to perform a
task for you* roll+Wis. ✴On a 10+ choose two. ✴On a 7–9 choose one. ✴On a miss,
some catastrophe occurs as a result of your calling.
    - The effect you desire comes to pass
    - You avoid paying nature’s price
    - You retain control
*** Balance
When you *deal damage*, take 1 balance. When you touch someone and channel the
spirits of life you may spend balance. For each balance spent, heal 1d4 HP.
When you gain a level from 6–10, choose from these moves or the level 2–5 moves.
*** Embracing No Form
When you shapeshift, roll 1d4 and add that total to your hold.
*** Doppelgänger’s Dance
You are able to study the essence of specific individuals to take their exact
form, including men, elves, or the like. Suppressing your tell is possible, but
if you do, take -1 ongoing until you return to your own form.
*** Blood and Thunder
Replaces: Red of Tooth and Claw
When you *are in an appropriate animal form* (something dangerous) increase your
damage to d10.
*** The Druid Sleep
When you take this move, the next opportunity that you have safety and time to
spend in an appropriate location, you may attune yourself to a new land. This
effect occurs only once and the GM will tell you how long it will take and what
cost you must pay. From then on, you are considered to be born of the soil in
both lands.
*** World-Talker
Requires: Thing-Talker
You see the patterns that make up the fabric of the world. You may now apply
your spirit tongue, shapeshifter and studied essence moves to pure
elements—fire, water, air and earth.
*** Stalker’s Sister
Requires: Hunter’s Brother
Choose one move from the ranger class list.
*** Formshaper
Requires: Formcrafter
You may increase your armor by 1 or deal an additional +1d4 damage while in an
animal form. Choose which when you shapeshift.
*** Chimera
When you shapeshift, you may create a merged form of up to three different
shapes. You may be a bear with the wings of an eagle and the head of a ram, for
example. Each feature will grant you a different move to make. Your chimera form
follows the same rules as shapeshifter otherwise.
*** Weather Weaver
When you are under open skies when the sun rises the GM will ask you what the
weather will be that day. Tell them whatever you like, it comes to pass.

* The Fighter
It’s a thankless job—living day to day by your armor and the skill of your arm.
To dive heedlessly into danger. They won’t be playing golden horns for the time
you took that knife to the ribs for them in the bar in Bucksberg. No flock of
angels to sing of the time you dragged them, still screaming, from the edge of
the Pits of Madness, no.

Forget them.

You do this for the guts and the glory. The scream of battle and the hot, hot
blood of it. You are a beast of iron. Your friends may carry blades of forged
steel but, fighter, you are steel. While your traveling companions might moan
about their wounds over a campfire in the wilderness, you bear your scars with
pride.

You are the wall—let every danger smash itself to nothing on you. In the end,
you’ll be the last one standing.
** Names
/Dwarf/: Ozruk, Surtur, Brunhilda, Annika, Janos, Greta, Dim, Rundrig, Jarl,
Xotoq
/Elf/: Elohiir, Sharaseth, Hasrith, Shevaral, Cadeus, Eldar, Kithracet, Thelian
/Halfling/: Finnegan, Olive, Randolph, Bartleby, Aubrey, Baldwin, Becca
/Human/: Hawke, Rudiger, Gregor, Brianne, Walton, Castor, Shanna, Ajax, Hob
** Look
Choose one for each:
Hard Eyes, Dead Eyes, or Eager Eyes
Wild Hair, Shorn Hair, or Battered Helm
Calloused Skin, Tanned Skin, or Scarred Skin
Built Body, Lithe Body, or Ravaged Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 10+Constitution.
Your base damage is d10.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Dwarf
When you *share a drink with someone*, you may parley with them using CON
instead of CHA.
*** Elf
Choose one weapon—you can always treat weapons of that type as if they had the
precise tag.
*** Halfling
When you defy danger and *use your small size to your advantage*, take +1.
*** Human
Once per battle you may reroll a single damage roll (yours or someone else’s).
You start with these moves:
*** Bend Bars, Lift Gates
When you *use pure strength to destroy an inanimate obstacle*, roll+Str. ✴On a
10+, choose 3. ✴On a 7-9 choose 2.
    - It doesn’t take a very long time
    - Nothing of value is damaged
    - It doesn’t make an inordinate amount of noise
    - You can fix the thing again without a lot of effort
*** Armored
You ignore the clumsy tag on armor you wear.
*** Signature Weapon
This is your weapon. There are many like it, but this one is yours. Your weapon
is your best friend. It is your life. You master it as you master your life.
Your weapon, without you, is useless. Without your weapon, you are useless. You
must wield your weapon true.

Choose a base description, all are 2 weight:
    - Sword
    - Axe
    - Hammer
    - Spear
    - Flail
    - Fists
Choose the range that best fits your weapon:
    - Hand
    - Close
    - Reach
Choose two enhancements:
    - Hooks and spikes. +1 damage, but +1 weight.
    - Sharp. +2 piercing.
    - Perfectly weighted. Add precise.
    - Serrated edges. +1 damage.
    - Glows in the presence of one type of creature, your choice.
    - Huge. Add messy and forceful.
    - Versatile. Choose an additional range.
    - Well-crafted. -1 weight.
Choose a look:
    - Ancient
    - Unblemished
    - Ornate
    - Blood-stained
    - Sinister
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Good
Defend those weaker than you.
*** Neutral
Defeat a worthy opponent.
*** Evil
Kill a defenseless or surrendered enemy.
** Gear
Your load is 12+Str. You carry your signature weapon and dungeon rations (5
uses, 1 weight). Choose your defenses:
    - Chainmail (1 armor, 1 weight) and adventuring gear (1 weight)
    - Scale armor (2 armor, 3 weight)
Choose two:
    - 2 Healing potions (0 weight)
    - Shield (+1 armor, 2 weight)
    - Antitoxin (0 weight), dungeon rations (1 weight), and poultices and herbs
      (1 weight)
    - 22 coins
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

_______________ owes me their life, whether they admit it or not.

I have sworn to protect _______________.

I worry about the ability of _______________ to survive in the dungeon.

_______________ is soft, but I will make them hard like me.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2-5, choose from these moves.
*** Merciless
When you deal damage, deal +1d4 damage.
*** Heirloom
When you *consult the spirits that reside within your signature weapon*, they
will give you an insight relating to the current situation, and might ask you
some questions in return, roll+CHA. ✴On a 10+, the GM will give you good detail.
✴On a 7-9, the GM will give you an impression.
*** Armor Mastery
When you *make your armor take the brunt of damage dealt to you*, the damage is
negated but you must reduce the armor value of your armor or shield (your
choice) by 1. The value is reduced each time you make this choice. If the
reduction leaves the item with 0 armor it is destroyed.
*** Improved Weapon
Choose one extra enhancement for your signature weapon.
*** Seeing Red
When you discern realities during combat, you take +1.
*** Interrogator
When you *parley using threats of impending violence as leverage*, you may use
STR instead of CHA.
*** Scent of Blood
When you hack and slash an enemy, your next attack against that same foe deals
+1d4 damage.
*** Multiclass Dabbler
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
*** Iron Hide
You gain +1 armor.
*** Blacksmith
When you have access to a forge you can graft the magical powers of a weapon
onto your signature weapon. This process destroys the magical weapon. Your
signature weapon gains the magical powers of the destroyed weapon.
When you gain a level from 6-10, choose from these moves or the level 2-5 moves.
*** Bloodthirsty
Replaces: Merciless
When you deal damage, deal +1d8 damage.
*** Armored Perfection
Replaces: Armor Mastery
When you *choose to let your armor take the brunt of damage dealt to you*, the
damage is negated and you take +1 forward against the attacker, but you must
reduce the armor value of your armor or shield (your choice) by 1. The value is
reduced each time you make this choice. If the reduction leaves the item with 0
armor it is destroyed.
*** Evil Eye
Requires: Seeing Red
When you *enter combat*, roll+CHA. ✴On a 10+, hold 2. ✴On a 7-9, hold 1. Spend
your hold to make eye contact with an NPC present, who freezes or flinches and
can’t act until you break it off. ✴On a 6-, your enemies immediately identify
you as their biggest threat.
*** Taste of Blood
Replaces: Scent of Blood
When you hack and slash an enemy, your next attack against that same foe deals
+1d8 damage.
*** Multiclass Initiate
Requires: Multiclass Dabbler
Get one move from another class. Treat your level as one lower for choosing the
move.
*** Steel Hide
Replaces: Iron Hide
You gain +2 armor.
*** Through Death’s Eyes
When you *go into battle*, roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+, name someone who will live *and*
someone who will die. ✴On a 7-9, name someone who will live *or* someone who
will die. Name NPCs, not player characters. The GM will make your vision come
true, if it’s even remotely possible. ✴On a 6- you see your own death and
consequently take -1 ongoing throughout the battle.
*** Eye for Weaponry
When you look over an enemy’s weaponry, ask the GM how much damage they do.
*** Superior Warrior
When you hack and slash on a 12+ you deal your damage, avoid their attack, and
impress, dismay, or frighten your enemy.

* The Paladin
Hell awaits. An eternity of torment in fire or ice or whatever best suits the
sins of the damned throngs of Dungeon World. All that stands between the pits of
that grim torture and salvation is you. Holy man, armored war machine, templar
of the Good and the Light, right? The cleric may say his prayers at night to the
gods, dwelling in their heavens. The fighter may wield his sharp sword in the
name of “good” but you know. Only you.

Eyes, hands, and sweet killing blow of the gods, you are. Yours is the gift of
righteousness and virtue. Of justice. Vision, too. A purity of intent that your
companions do not have.

So guide these fools, paladin. Take up your holy cause and bring salvation to
the wastrel world.

Vae victis, right?
** Names
Thaddeus, Augustine, Lux, Cassius, Hadrian, Lucia, Octavia, Regulus, Valeria,
Sanguinus, Titanius
** Look
Choose one for each:
Kind Eyes, Fiery Eyes, or Glowing Eyes
Helmet, Styled Hair, or Bald
Worn Holy Symbol or Fancy Holy Symbol
Fit Body, Bulky Body, or Thin Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 10+Constitution.
Your base damage is d10.
** Starting Moves
You are human, so you get this move.
*** Human
When you *pray for guidance, even for a moment, and ask, “What here is evil?”*
the GM will tell you, honestly.
You start with these moves:
*** Lay on Hands (Cha)
When you *touch someone, skin to skin, and pray for their well-being *,
roll+CHA. ✴On a 10+ you heal 1d8 damage or remove one disease. ✴On a 7–9, they
are healed, but the damage or disease is transferred to you.
*** Armored
You ignore the clumsy tag on armor you wear.
*** I Am the Law
When you *give an NPC an order based on your divine authority*, roll+Cha. ✴On a
7+, they choose one:
    - Do what you say
    - Back away cautiously, then flee
    - Attack you
✴On a 10+, you also take +1 forward against them. ✴On a miss, they do as they
please and you take -1 forward against them.
*** Quest
When you *dedicate yourself to a mission through prayer and ritual cleansing*,
state what you set out to do:
    - Slay _______, a great blight on the land
    - Defend _______ from the iniquities that beset them
    - Discover the truth of _______
Then choose up to two boons:
    - An unwavering sense of direction to _______.
    - Invulnerability to _______ (e.g., edged weapons, fire, enchantment, etc.)
    - A mark of divine authority
    - Senses that pierce lies
    - A voice that transcends language
    - A freedom from hunger, thirst, and sleep
The GM will then tell you what vow or vows is required of you to maintain your
blessing:
    - Honor (forbidden: cowardly tactics and tricks)
    - Temperance (forbidden: gluttony in food, drink, and pleasure of the flesh)
    - Piety (required: observance of daily holy services)
    - Valor (forbidden: suffering an evil creature to live)
    - Truth (forbidden: lies)
    - Hospitality (required: comfort to those in need, no matter who they are)
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Lawful
Deny mercy to a criminal or unbeliever.
*** Good
Endanger yourself to protect someone weaker than you.
** Gear
Your load is 12+Str. You start with dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight), scale
armor (2 armor, 3 weight), and some mark of faith, describe it (0 weight).
Choose your weapon:
    - Halberd (reach, +1 damage, two-handed, 2 weight)
    - Long sword (close, +1 damage, 1 weight) and shield (+1 armor, 2 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight)
    - Dungeon rations (1 weight) and healing potion (0 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

_______________’s misguided behavior endangers their very soul!

_______________ has stood by me in battle and can be trusted completely.

I respect the beliefs of _______________ but hope they will someday see the true
way.

_______________ is a brave soul, I have much to learn from them.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2–5, choose from these moves.
*** Divine Favor
Dedicate yourself to a deity (name a new one or choose one that’s already been
established). You gain the commune and cast a spell cleric moves. When you
select this move, treat yourself as a cleric of level 1 for using spells. Every
time you gain a level thereafter, increase your effective cleric level by 1.
*** Bloody Aegis
When you take damage you can grit your teeth and accept the blow. If you do you
take no damage but instead suffer a debility of your choice. If you already have
all six debilities you can’t use this move.
*** Smite
While on a quest you deal +1d4 damage.
*** Exterminatus
When you *speak aloud your promise to defeat an enemy*, you deal +2d4 damage
against that enemy and -4 damage against anyone else. This effect lasts until
the enemy is defeated. If you fail to defeat the enemy or give up the fight, you
can admit your failure, but the effect continues until you find a way to redeem
yourself.
*** Charge!
When you *lead the charge into combat*, those you lead take +1 forward.
*** Staunch Defender
When you defend you always get +1 hold, even on a 6-.
*** Setup Strike
When you hack and slash, choose an ally. Their next attack against your target
does +1d4 damage.
*** Holy Protection
You get +1 armor while on a quest.
*** Voice of Authority
Take +1 to order hirelings.
*** Hospitaller
When you heal an ally, you heal +1d8 damage.
When you gain a level from 6–10, choose from these moves or the level 2–5 moves.
*** Evidence of Faith
Requires: Divine Favor
When you *see divine magic as it happens*, you can ask the GM which deity
granted the spell and its effects. Take +1 when acting on the answers.
*** Holy Smite
Replaces: Smite
While on a quest you deal +1d8 damage.
*** Ever Onward
Replaces: Charge!
When you lead the charge into combat, those you lead take +1 forward and +2
armor forward.
*** Impervious Defender
Replaces: Staunch Defender
When you defend you always get +1 hold, even on a 6-. When you get a 12+ to
defend instead of getting hold the nearest attacking creature is stymied giving
you a clear advantage, the GM will describe it.
*** Tandem Strike
Replaces: Setup Strike
When you hack and slash, choose an ally. Their next attack against your target
does +1d4 damage and they take +1 forward against them.
*** Divine Protection
Replaces: Holy Protection
You get +2 armor while on a quest.
*** Divine Authority
Replaces: Voice of Authority
Take +1 to order hirelings. When you roll a 12+ the hireling transcends their
moment of fear and doubt and carries out your order with particular
effectiveness or efficiency.
*** Perfect Hospitaller
Replaces: Hospitaller
When you heal an ally, you heal +2d8 damage.
*** Indomitable
When you suffer a debility (even through Bloody Aegis) take +1 forward against
whatever caused it.
*** Perfect Knight
When you quest you choose three boons instead of two.

* The Ranger
These city-born folk you travel with. Have they heard the call of the wolf? Felt
the winds howl in the bleak deserts of the East? Have they hunted their prey
with the bow and the knife like you? Hell no. That’s why they need you.

Guide. Hunter. Creature of the wilds. You are these things and more. Your time
in the wilderness may have been solitary until now, but the call of some greater
thing—call it fate if you like—has cast your lot with these folk. Brave, they
may be. Powerful and strong, too. You know the secrets of the spaces between,
though.

Without you, they’d be lost. Blaze a trail through the blood and dark, strider.
** Names
/Elf/: Throndir, Elrosine, Aranwe, Celion, Dambrath, Lanethe
/Human/: Jonah, Halek, Brandon, Emory, Shrike, Nora, Diana
** Look
Choose one for each:
Wild Eyes, Sharp Eyes, or Animal Eyes
Hooded Head, Wild Hair, or Bald
Cape, Camouflage, or Traveling Clothes
Lithe Body, Wild Body, or Sharp Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 8+Constitution.
Your base damage is d8.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Elf
When you undertake a perilous journey through wilderness whatever job you take
you succeed as if you rolled a 10+.
*** Human
When you make camp in a dungeon or city, you don’t need to consume a ration.
You start with these moves:
*** Hunt and Track (Wis)
When you *follow a trail of clues left behind by passing creatures*, roll+WIS.
✴On a 7+, you follow the creature’s trail until there’s a significant change in
its direction or mode of travel. ✴On a 10+, you also choose 1:
    - Gain a useful bit of information about your quarry, the GM will tell you
      what
    - Determine what caused the trail to end
*** Called Shot
When you *attack a defenseless or surprised enemy at range*, you can choose to
deal your damage or name your target and roll+DEX.
    - Head ✴10+: As 7–9, plus your damage ✴7-9: They do nothing but stand and
      drool for a few moments.
    - Arms ✴10+: As 7-9, plus your damage ✴7-9: They drop anything they’re
      holding.
    - Legs ✴10+: As 7-9, plus your damage ✴7-9: They’re hobbled and slow moving.
*** Animal Companion
You have a supernatural connection with a loyal animal. You can’t talk to it per
se but it always acts as you wish it to. Name your animal companion and choose a
species:
Wolf, cougar, bear, eagle, dog, hawk, cat, owl, pigeon, rat, mule
Choose a base:
    - Ferocity +2, Cunning +1, 1 Armor, Instinct +1
    - Ferocity +2, Cunning +2, 0 Armor, Instinct +1
    - Ferocity +1, Cunning +2, 1 Armor, Instinct +1
    - Ferocity +3, Cunning +1, 1 Armor, Instinct +2
Choose as many strengths as its ferocity:
Fast, burly, huge, calm, adaptable, quick reflexes, tireless, camouflage,
ferocious, intimidating, keen senses, stealthy
Your animal companion is trained to fight humanoids. Choose as many additional
trainings as its cunning:
Hunt, search, scout, guard, fight monsters, perform, labor, travel
Choose as many weaknesses as its instinct:
Flighty, savage, slow, broken, frightening, forgetful, stubborn, lame
*** Command
When you work with your animal companion on something it’s trained in…
    - …and you attack the same target, add its ferocity to your damage
    - …and you track, add its cunning to your roll
    - …and you take damage, add its armor to your armor
    - …and you discern realities, add its cunning to your roll
    - …and you parley, add its cunning to your roll
    - …and someone interferes with you, add its instinct to their roll
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Chaotic
Free someone from literal or figurative bonds.
*** Good
Endanger yourself to combat an unnatural threat.
*** Neutral
Help an animal or spirit of the wild.
** Gear
Your load is 11+Str. You start with dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight), leather
armor (1 armor, 1 weight), and a bundle of arrows (3 ammo, 1 weight). Choose
your armament:
    - Hunter’s bow (near, far, 1 weight) and short sword (close, 1 weight)
    - Hunter’s bow (near, far, 1 weight) and spear (reach, 1 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight) and dungeon rations (1 weight)
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight) and bundle of arrows (3 ammo, 1 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

I have guided _______________ before and they owe me for it.

_______________ is a friend of nature, so I will be their friend as well.

_______________ has no respect for nature, so I have no respect for them.

_______________ does not understand life in the wild, so I will teach them.
** Advanced Moves
You may take this move only if it is your first advancement.
*** Half-Elven
Somewhere in your lineage lies mixed blood and it begins to show its presence.
You gain the elf starting move if you took the human one at character creation
or vice versa.
When you gain a level from 2-5, choose from these moves.
*** Wild Empathy
You can speak with and understand animals.
*** Familiar Prey
When you spout lore about a monster you use WIS instead of INT.
*** Viper’s Strike
When you strike an enemy with two weapons at once, add an extra 1d4 damage for
your off-hand strike.
*** Camouflage
When you *keep still in natural surroundings*, enemies never spot you until you
make a movement.
*** Man’s Best Friend
When you *allow your animal companion to take a blow that was meant for you*,
the damage is negated and your animal companion’s ferocity becomes 0. If its
ferocity is already 0 you can’t use this ability. When you have a few hours of
rest with your animal companion its ferocity returns to normal.
*** Blot Out the Sun
When you volley you may spend extra ammo before rolling. For each point of ammo
spent you may choose an extra target. Roll once and apply damage to all targets.
*** Well-Trained
Choose another training for your animal companion.
*** God Amidst the Wastes
Dedicate yourself to a deity (name a new one or choose one that’s already been
established). You gain the commune and cast a spell cleric moves. When you
select this move, treat yourself as a cleric of level 1 for using spells. Every
time you gain a level thereafter, increase your effective cleric level by 1.
*** Follow Me
When you undertake a perilous journey you can take two roles. You make a
separate roll for each.
*** A Safe Place
When you *set the watch for the night*, everyone takes +1 to take watch.
When you gain a level from 6-10, choose from these moves or the level 2-5 moves.
*** Wild Speech
Replaces: Wild Empathy
You can speak with and understand any non-magical, non-planar creature.
*** Hunter’s Prey
Replaces: Familiar Prey
When you spout lore about a monster you use WIS instead of INT. On a 12+, in
addition to the normal effects, you get to ask the GM any one question about the
subject.
*** Viper’s Fangs
Replaces: Viper’s Strike
When you strike an enemy with two weapons at once, add an extra 1d8 damage for
your off-hand strike.
*** Smaug’s Belly
When you know your target’s weakest point your arrows have 2 piercing.
*** Strider
Replaces: Follow Me
When you undertake a perilous journey you can take two roles. Roll twice and use
the better result for both roles.
*** A Safer Place
Replaces: A Safe Place
When you set the watch for the night everyone takes +1 to take watch. After a
night in camp when you set the watch everyone takes +1 forward.
*** Observant
When you hunt and track, on a hit you may also ask one question about the
creature you are tracking from the discern realities list for free.
*** Special Trick
Choose a move from another class. So long as you are working with your animal
companion you have access to that move.
*** Unnatural Ally
Your animal companion is a monster, not an animal. Describe it. Give it +2
ferocity and +1 instinct, plus a new training.

* The Thief
You’ve heard them, sitting around the campfire. Bragging about this battle or
that. About how their gods are smiling on your merry band. You count your coins
and smile to yourself—this is the thrill above all. You alone know the secret of
Dungeon World—filthy filthy lucre.

Sure, they give you lip for all the times you’ve snuck off alone but without
you, who among them wouldn’t have been dissected by a flying guillotine or
poisoned straight to death by some ancient needle trap? So, let them complain.
When you’re done with all this delving you’ll toast their hero’s graves.

From your castle. Full of gold. You rogue.
** Names
/Halfling/: Felix, Rook, Mouse, Sketch, Trixie, Robin, Omar, Brynn, Bug
/Human/: Sparrow, Shank, Jack, Marlow, Dodge, Rat, Pox, Humble, Farley
** Look
Choose one for each:
Shifty Eyes or Criminal Eyes
Hooded Head, Messy Hair, or Cropped Hair
Dark Clothes, Fancy Clothes, or Common Clothes
Lithe Body, Knobby Body, or Flabby Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 6+Constitution.
Your base damage is d8.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Halfling
When you attack with a ranged weapon, deal +2 damage.
*** Human
You are a professional. When you spout lore or discern realities about criminal
activities, take +1.
You start with these moves:
*** Trap Expert
When you *spend a moment to survey a dangerous area*, roll+DEX. ✴On a 10+, hold
3. ✴On a 7–9, hold 1. Spend your hold as you walk through the area to ask these
questions:
    - Is there a trap here and if so, what activates it?
    - What does the trap do when activated?
    - What else is hidden here?
*** Tricks of the Trade
When you *pick locks or pockets or disable traps*, roll+DEX. ✴On a 10+, you do
it, no problem. ✴On a 7–9, you still do it, but the GM will offer you two
options between suspicion, danger, or cost.
*** Backstab
When you *attack a surprised or defenseless enemy with a melee weapon*, you can
choose to deal your damage or roll+DEX. ✴On a 10+ choose two. ✴On a 7–9 choose
one.
    - You don’t get into melee with them
    - You deal your damage+1d6
    - You create an advantage, +1 forward to you or an ally acting on it
    - Reduce their armor by 1 until they repair it
*** Flexible Morals
When someone tries to detect your alignment you can tell them any alignment you
like.
*** Poisoner
You’ve mastered the care and use of a poison. Choose a poison from the list
below; that poison is no longer dangerous for you to use. You also start with
three uses of the poison you choose. Whenever you have time to gather materials
and a safe place to brew you can make three uses of the poison you choose for
free. Note that some poisons are applied, meaning you have to carefully apply it
to the target or something they eat or drink. Touch poisons just need to touch
the target, they can even be used on the blade of a weapon.
    - Oil of Tagit (applied): The target falls into a light sleep
    - Bloodweed (touch): The target deals -1d4 damage ongoing until cured
    - Goldenroot (applied): The target treats the next creature they see as a
      trusted ally, until proved otherwise
    - Serpent’s Tears (touch): Anyone dealing damage to the target rolls twice
      and takes the better result.
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Chaotic
Leap into danger without a plan.
*** Neutral
Avoid detection or infiltrate a location.
*** Evil
Shift danger or blame from yourself to someone else.
** Gear
Your load is 9+Str. You start with dungeon rations (5 uses, 1 weight), leather
armor (1 armor, 1 weight), 3 uses of your chosen poison, and 10 coins. Choose
your arms:
    - Dagger (hand, 1 weight) and short sword (close, 1 weight)
    - Rapier (close, precise, 1 weight)
Choose a ranged weapon:
    - 3 throwing daggers (thrown, near, 0 weight)
    - Ragged Bow (near, 2 weight) and bundle of arrows (3 ammo, 1 weight)
Choose one:
    - Adventuring gear (1 weight)
    - Healing potion (0 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

I stole something from _______________.

_______________ has my back when things go wrong.

_______________ knows incriminating details about me.

_______________ and I have a con running.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2–5, choose from these moves.
*** Cheap Shot
When using a precise or hand weapon, your backstab deals an extra +1d6 damage.
*** Cautious
When you use trap expert you always get +1 hold, even on a 6-.
*** Wealth and Taste
When you *make a show of flashing around your most valuable possession*, choose
someone present. They will do anything they can to obtain your item or one like
it.
*** Shoot First
You’re never caught by surprise. When an enemy would get the drop on you, you
get to act first instead.
*** Poison Master
After you’ve used a poison once it’s no longer dangerous for you to use.
*** Envenom
You can apply even complex poisons with a pinprick. When you apply a poison
that’s not dangerous for you to use to your weapon it’s touch instead of
applied.
*** Brewer
When you have time to gather materials and a safe place to brew you can create
three doses of any one poison you’ve used before.
*** Underdog
When you’re outnumbered, you have +1 armor.
*** Connections
When you put out word to the criminal underbelly about something you want or
need, roll+CHA. ✴On a 10+, someone has it, just for you. ✴On a 7–9, you’ll have
to settle for something close or it comes with strings attached, your call.
When you gain a level from 6–10, choose from these moves or the level 2–5 moves.
*** Dirty Fighter
Replaces: Cheap Shot
When using a precise or hand weapon, your backstab deals an extra +1d8 damage
and all other attacks deal +1d4 damage.
*** Extremely Cautious
Replaces: Cautious
When you use trap expert you always get +1 hold, even on a 6-. On a 12+ you get
3 hold and the next time you come near a trap the GM will immediately tell you
what it does, what triggers it, who set it, and how you can use it to your
advantage.
*** Alchemist
Replaces: Brewer
When you have you have time to gather materials and a safe place to brew you can
create three doses of any poison you’ve used before. Alternately you can
describe the effects of a poison you’d like to create. The GM will tell you that
you can create it, but with one or more caveats:
    - It will only work under specific circumstances
    - The best you can manage is a weaker version
    - It’ll take a while to take effect
    - It’ll have obvious side effects
*** Serious Underdog
Replaces: Underdog
You have +1 armor. When you’re outnumbered, you have +2 armor instead.
*** Evasion
When you defy danger on a 12+, you transcend the danger. You not only do what
you set out to, but the GM will offer you a better outcome, true beauty, or a
moment of grace.
*** Strong Arm, True Aim
You can throw any melee weapon, using it to volley. A thrown melee weapon is
gone; you can never choose to reduce ammo on a 7–9.
*** Escape Route
When you’re in too deep and need a way out, name your escape route and roll+DEX.
✴On a 10+ you’re gone. ✴On a 7–9 you can stay or go, but if you go it costs you:
leave something behind or take something with you, the GM will tell you what.
*** Disguise
When you have time and materials you can create a disguise that will fool anyone
into thinking you’re another creature of about the same size and shape. Your
actions can give you away but your appearance won’t.
*** Heist
When you take time to make a plan to steal something, name the thing you want to
steal and ask the GM these questions. When acting on the answers you and your
allies take +1 forward.
    - Who will notice it’s missing?
    - What’s its most powerful defense?
    - Who will come after it?
    - Who else wants it?

* The Wizard
Dungeon World has rules. Not the laws of men or the rule of some petty tyrant.
Bigger, better rules. You drop something—it falls. You can’t make something out
of nothing. The dead stay dead, right?

Oh, the things we tell ourselves to feel better about the long, dark nights.

You’ve spent so very long poring over those tomes of yours. The experiments that
nearly drove you mad and all the botched summonings that endangered your very
soul. For what? For power. What else is there? Not just the power of King or
Country but the power to boil a man’s blood in his veins. To call on the thunder
of the sky and the churn of the roiling earth. To shrug off the rules the world
holds so dear.

Let them cast their sidelong glances. Let them call you “warlock” or
“diabolist.” Who among them can hurl fireballs from their eyes?

Yeah. We didn’t think so.
** Names
/Elf/: Galadiir, Fenfaril, Lilliastre, Phirosalle, Enkirash, Halwyr
/Human/: Avon, Morgan, Rath, Ysolde, Ovid, Vitus, Aldara, Xeno, Uri
** Look
Choose one for each:
Haunted Eyes, Sharp Eyes, or Crazy Eyes
Styled Hair, Wild Hair, or Pointed Hat
Worn Robes, Stylish Robes, or Strange Robes
Pudgy Body, Creepy Body, or Thin Body
** Stats
Your maximum HP is 4+Constitution.
Your base damage is d4.
** Starting Moves
Choose a race and gain the corresponding move:
*** Elf
Magic is as natural as breath to you. Detect Magic is a cantrip for you.
*** Human
Choose one cleric spell. You can cast it as if it was a wizard spell.
You start with these moves:
*** Spellbook
You have mastered several spells and inscribed them in your spellbook. You start
out with three first level spells in your spellbook as well as the cantrips.
Whenever you gain a level, you add a new spell of your level or lower to your
spellbook. You spellbook is 1 weight.
*** Prepare Spells
When you *spend uninterrupted time (an hour or so) in quiet contemplation of
your spellbook*, you:
    - Lose any spells you already have prepared
    - Prepare new spells of your choice from your spellbook whose total levels
      don’t exceed your own level+1.
    - Prepare your cantrips which never count against your limit.
*** Cast a Spell (Int)
When you *release a spell you’ve prepared*, roll+Int. ✴On a 10+, the spell is
successfully cast and you do not forget the spell—you may cast it again later.
✴On a 7-9, the spell is cast, but choose one:
    - You draw unwelcome attention or put yourself in a spot. The GM will tell
      you how.
    - The spell disturbs the fabric of reality as it is cast—take -1 ongoing to
      cast a spell until the next time you Prepare Spells.
    - After it is cast, the spell is forgotten. You cannot cast the spell again
      until you prepare spells.
Note that maintaining spells with ongoing effects will sometimes cause a penalty
to your roll to cast a spell.
*** Spell Defense
You may end any ongoing spell immediately and use the energy of its dissipation
to deflect an oncoming attack. The spell ends and you subtract its level from
the damage done to you.
*** Ritual
When you *draw on a place of power to create a magical effect*, tell the GM what
you’re trying to achieve. Ritual effects are always possible, but the GM will
give you one to four of the following conditions:
    - It’s going to take days/weeks/months
    - First you must ____
    - You’ll need help from ____
    - It will require a lot of money
    - The best you can do is a lesser version, unreliable and limited
    - You and your allies will risk danger from ____
    - You’ll have to disenchant ____ to do it
** Alignment
Choose an alignment:
*** Good
Use magic to directly aid another.
*** Neutral
Discover something about a magical mystery.
*** Evil
Use magic to cause terror and fear.
** Gear
Your load is 7+Str. You start with your spellbook (1 weight) and dungeon rations
(5 uses, 1 weight). Choose your defenses:
    - Leather armor (1 armor, 1 weight)
    - Bag of books (5 uses, 2 weight) and 3 healing potions
Choose your weapon:
    - Dagger (hand, 1 weight)
    - Staff (close, two-handed, 1 weight)
Choose one:
    - Healing potion (0 weight)
    - 3 antitoxins (0 weight)
** Bonds
Fill in the name of one of your companions in at least one:

_______________ will play an important role in the events to come. I have
foreseen it!

_______________ is keeping an important secret from me.

_______________ is woefully misinformed about the world; I will teach them all
that I can.
** Advanced Moves
When you gain a level from 2-5, choose from these moves. You also add a new
spell to your spellbook at each level.
*** Prodigy
Choose a spell. You prepare that spell as if it were one level lower.
*** Empowered Magic
When you cast a spell, on a 10+ you have the option of choosing from the 7-9
list. If you do, you may choose one of these as well:
    - The spell’s effects are maximized
    - The spell’s targets are doubled
*** Fount of Knowledge
When you *spout lore about something no one else has any clue about*, take +1.
*** Know-It-All
When *another player’s character comes to you for advice and you tell them what
you think is best*, they get +1 forward when following your advice and you mark
experience if they do.
*** Expanded Spellbook
Add a new spell from the spell list of any class to your spellbook.
*** Enchanter
When you have time and safety with a magic item you may ask the GM what it does,
the GM will answer you truthfully.
*** Logical
When you *use strict deduction to analyze your surroundings*, you can discern
realities with INT instead of WIS.
*** Arcane Ward
As long as you have at least one prepared spell of first level or higher, you
have +2 armor.
*** Counterspell
When you *attempt to counter an arcane spell that will otherwise affect you*,
stake one of your prepared spells on the defense and roll+Int. ✴On a 10+, the
spell is countered and has no effect on you. ✴On a 7-9, the spell is countered
and you forget the spell you staked. Your counterspell protects only you; if the
countered spell has other targets they get its effects.
*** Quick Study
When you *see the effects of an arcane spell*, ask the GM the name of the spell
and its effects. You take +1 when acting on the answers.
When you gain a level from 6-10, choose from these moves or the level 2-5 moves.
*** Master
Requires: Prodigy
Choose one spell in addition to the one you picked for prodigy. You prepare that
spell as if it were one level lower.
*** Greater Empowered Magic
Replaces: Empowered Magic
When you cast a spell, on a 10-11 you have the option of choosing from the 7-9
list. If you do, you may choose one of these effects as well. On a 12+ you get
to choose one of these effects for free:
    - The spell’s effects are doubled
    - The spell’s targets are doubled
*** Enchanter’s Soul
Requires: Enchanter
When you have time and safety with a magic item in a place of power you can
empower that item so that the next time you use it its effects are amplified,
the GM will tell you exactly how.
*** Highly Logical
Replaces: Logical
When you *use strict deduction to analyze your surroundings*, you can discern
realities with Int instead of Wis. On a 12+ you get to ask the GM any three
questions, not limited by the list.
*** Arcane Armor
Replaces: Arcane Ward
As long as you have at least one prepared spell of first level or higher, you
have +4 armor.
*** Protective Counter
Requires: Counterspell
When an ally within sight of you is affected by an arcane spell, you can counter
it as if it affected you. If the spell affects multiple allies you must counter
for each ally separately.
*** Ethereal Tether
When you have time with a willing or helpless subject you can craft an ethereal
tether with them. You perceive what they perceive and can discern realities
about someone tethered to you or their surroundings no matter the distance.
Someone willingly tethered to you can communicate with you over the tether as if
you were in the room with them.
*** Mystical Puppet Strings
When you *use magic to control a person’s actions* they have no memory of what
you had them do and bear you no ill will.
*** Spell Augmentation
When you *deal damage to a creature* you can shunt a spell’s energy into
them—end one of your ongoing spells and add the spell’s level to the damage
dealt.
*** Self-Powered
When you have time, arcane materials, and a safe space, you can create your own
place of power. Describe to the GM what kind of power it is and how you’re
binding it to this place, the GM will tell you one kind of creature that will
have an interest in your workings.
* Wizard Spells
** Cantrips
You prepare all of your cantrips every time you prepare spells without having to
select them or count them toward your allotment of spells.
*Light* Cantrip
An item you touch glows with arcane light, about as bright as a torch. It gives
off no heat or sound and requires no fuel, but it is otherwise like a mundane
torch. You have complete control of the color of the flame. The spell lasts as
long as it is in your presence.
*Unseen Servant* Cantrip /Ongoing/
You conjure a simple invisible construct that can do nothing but carry items. It
has load 3 and carries anything you hand to it. It cannot pick up items on its
own and can only carry those you give to it. Items carried by an unseen servant
appear to float in the air a few paces behind you. An unseen servant that takes
damage or leaves your presence is immediately dispelled, dropping any items it
carried. Otherwise the unseen servant serves you until you end the spell.
*Prestidigitation* Cantrip
You perform minor tricks of true magic. If you touch an item as part of the
casting you can make cosmetic changes to it: clean it, soil it, cool it, warm
it, flavor it, or change its color. If you cast the spell without touching an
item you can instead create minor illusions no bigger than yourself.
Prestidigitation illusions are crude and clearly illusions—they won’t fool
anyone, but they might entertain them.
** Level 1 Spells
*Contact Spirits* Level 1 /Summoning/
Name the spirit you wish to contact (or leave it to the GM). You pull that
creature through the planes, just close enough to speak to you. It is bound to
answer any one question you ask to the best of its ability.
*Detect Magic* Level 1 /Divination/
One of your senses is briefly attuned to magic. The GM will tell you what here
is magical.
*Telepathy* Level 1 /Divination Ongoing/
You form a telepathic bond with a single person you touch, enabling you to
converse with that person through your thoughts. You can only have one
telepathic bond at a time.
*Charm Person* Level 1 /Enchantment Ongoing/
The person (not beast or monster) you touch while casting this spell counts you
as a friend until they take damage or you prove otherwise.
*Invisibility* Level 1 /Illusion Ongoing/
Touch an ally: nobody can see them. They’re invisible! The spell persists until
the target attacks or you dismiss the effect. While the spell is ongoing you
can’t cast a spell.
*Magic Missile* Level 1 /Evocation/
Projectiles of pure magic spring from your fingers. Deal 2d4 damage to one
target.
*Alarm* Level 1
Walk a wide circle as you cast this spell. Until you prepare spells again your
magic will alert you if a creature crosses that circle. Even if you are asleep,
the spell will shake you from your slumber.
** Level 3 Spells
*Dispel Magic* Level 3
Choose a spell or magic effect in your presence: this spell rips it apart.
Lesser spells are ended, powerful magic is just reduced or dampened so long as
you are nearby.
*Visions Through Time* Level 3 /Divination/
Cast this spell and gaze into a reflective surface to see into the depths of
time. The GM will reveal the details of a grim portent to you—a bleak event that
will come to pass without your intervention. They’ll tell you something useful
about how you can interfere with the grim portent’s dark outcomes. Rare is the
portent that claims “You’ll live happily ever after.” Sorry.
*Fireball* Level 3 /Evocation/
You evoke a mighty ball of flame that envelops your target and everyone nearby,
inflicting 2d6 damage which ignores armor.
*Mimic* Level 3 /Ongoing/
You take the form of someone you touch while casting this spell. Your physical
characteristics match theirs exactly but your behavior may not. This change
persists until you take damage or choose to return to your own form. While this
spell is ongoing you lose access to all your wizard moves.
*Mirror Image* Level 3 /Illusion/
You create an illusory image of yourself. When you are attacked, roll a d6. On a
4, 5, or 6 the attack hits the illusion instead, the image then dissipates and
the spell ends.
*Sleep* Level 3 /Enchantment/
1d4 enemies you can see of the GM’s choice fall asleep. Only creatures capable
of sleeping are affected. They awake as normal: loud noises, jolts, pain.
** Level 5 Spells
*Cage* Level 5 /Evocation Ongoing/
The target is held in a cage of magical force. Nothing can get in or out of the
cage. The cage remains until you cast another spell or dismiss it. While the
spell is ongoing, the caged creature can hear your thoughts and you cannot leave
sight of the cage.
*Contact Other Plane* Level 5 /Divination/
You send a request to another plane. Specify who or what you’d like to contact
by location, type of creature, name, or title. You open a two-way communication
with that creature. Your communication can be cut off at any time by you or the
creature you contacted.
*Polymorph* Level 5 /Enchantment/
Your touch reshapes a creature entirely, they stay in the form you craft until
you cast a spell. Describe the new shape you craft, including any stat changes,
significant adaptations, or major weaknesses. The GM will then tell you one or
more of these:
    - The form will be unstable and temporary
    - The creature’s mind will be altered as well
    - The form has an unintended benefit or weakness
*Summon Monster* Level 5 /Summoning Ongoing/
A monster appears and aids you as best it can. Treat it as your character, but
with access to only the basic moves. It has +1 modifier for all stats, 1 HP, and
uses your damage dice. The monster also gets your choice of 1d6 of these traits:
    - It has +2 instead of +1 to one stat
    - It’s not reckless
    - It does 1d8 damage
    - Its bond to your plane is strong: +2 HP for each level you have
    - It has some useful adaptation
The GM will tell you the type of monster you get based on the traits you select.
The creature remains on this plane until it dies or you dismiss it. While the
spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
** Level 7 Spells
*Dominate* Level 7 /Enchantment Ongoing/
Your touch pushes your mind into someone else’s. You gain 1d4 hold. Spend one
hold to make the target take one of these actions:
    - Speak a few words of your choice
    - Give you something they hold
    - Make a concerted attack on a target of your choice
    - Truthfully answer one question
If you run out of hold the spell ends. If the target takes damage you lose 1
hold. While the spell is ongoing you cannot cast a spell.
*True Seeing* Level 7 /Divination Ongoing/
You see all things as they truly are. This effect persists until you tell a lie
or dismiss the spell. While this spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a spell.
*Shadow Walk* Level 7 /Illusion/
The shadows you target with this spell become a portal for you and your allies.
Name a location, describing it with a number of words up to your level. Stepping
through the portal deposits you and any allies present when you cast the spell
at the location you described. The portal may only be used once by each ally.
*Contingency* Level 7 /Evocation/
Choose a 5th level or lower spell you know. Describe a trigger condition using a
number of words equal to your level. The chosen spell is held until you choose
to unleash it or the trigger condition is met, whichever happens first. You
don’t have to roll for the held spell, it just takes effect. You may only have a
single contingent spell held at a time; if you cast Contingency while you have a
held spell, the new held spell replaces the old one.
*Cloudkill* Level 7 /Summoning Ongoing/
A cloud of fog drifts into this realm from beyond the Black Gates of Death,
filling the immediate area. Whenever a creature in the area takes damage it
takes an additional, separate 1d6 damage which ignores armor. This spell
persists so long as you can see the affected area, or until you dismiss it.
** Level 9 Spells
*Antipathy* Level 9 /Enchantment Ongoing/
Choose a target and describe a type of creature or an alignment. Creatures of
the specified type or alignment cannot come within sight of the target. If a
creature of the specified type does find itself within sight of the target, it
immediately flees. This effect continues until you leave the target’s presence
or you dismiss the spell. While the spell is ongoing you take -1 to cast a
spell.
*Alert* Level 9 /Divination/
Describe an event. The GM will tell you when that event occurs, no matter where
you are or how far away the event is. If you choose, you can view the location
of the event as though you were there in person. You can only have one Alert
active at a time.
*Soul Gem* Level 9
You trap the soul of a dying creature within a gem. The trapped creature is
aware of its imprisonment but can still be manipulated through spells, parley,
and other effects. All moves against the trapped creature are at +1. You can
free the soul at any time but it can never be recaptured once freed.
*Shelter* Level 9 /Evocation Ongoing/
You create a structure out of pure magical power. It can be as large as a castle
or as small as a hut, but is impervious to all non-magical damage. The structure
endures until you leave it or you end the spell.
*Perfect Summons* Level 9 /Summoning/
You teleport a creature to your presence. Name a creature or give a short
description of a type of creature. If you named a creature, that creature
appears before you. If you described a type of creature, a creature of that type
appears before you.

* The GM
There are many different fantasy genres, each with their own style or advice for
GMing. Dungeon World is designed for one of those styles in particular—a world
of elves, orcs, dragons and magic where dark dangers mix with lighthearted
adventure. The rules in this chapter will help you run a game in that style.

The characters have rules to follow when they roll dice and take actions. The GM
has rules to follow, too. You’ll be refereeing, adjudicating, and describing the
world as you go—Dungeon World provides a framework to guide you in doing so.

This chapter isn’t about advice for the GM or optional tips and tricks on how
best to play Dungeon World. It’s a chapter with procedures and rules for whoever
takes on the role of GM.
*** GMing Dungeon World: A Framework
Running a game of Dungeon World is built on these: the GM’s *agenda*,
*principles*, and *moves*. The agenda is what you set out to do when you sit
down at the table. The principles are the guides that keep you focused on that
agenda. The GM’s moves are the concrete, moment-to-moment things you do to move
the game forward. You’ll make moves when players miss their rolls, when the
rules call for it, and whenever the players look to you to see what happens.
Your moves keep the fiction consistent and the game’s action moving forward.

The GM’s agenda, principles, and moves are rules just like damage or stats or
HP. You should take the same care in altering them or ignoring them that you
would with any other rule.
** How to GM
When you sit down at the table as a GM you do these things:
    - Describe the situation
    - Follow the rules
    - Make moves
    - Exploit your prep
The players have it easy—they just say what their characters say, think, and do.
You have it a bit harder. You have to say everything else. What does that
entail?

First and foremost, you *describe the immediate situation around the players at
all times*. This is how you start a session, how you get things rolling after a
snack break, get back on track after a great joke: tell them what the situation
is in concrete terms.

Use detail and senses to draw them in. The situation isn’t just an orc charging
you, it’s an orc painted in blood swinging a hammer and yelling bloody murder.
You can leverage a lack of information, too. The sound of clattering armor and
shuffling feet, for instance.

The situation around them is rarely “everything’s great, nothing to worry
about.” They’re adventurers going on adventures—give them something to react to.

When you describe the situation, always end with “What do you do?” Dungeon World
is about action and adventure! Portray a situation that demands a response.

From the get-go make sure to *follow the rules*. This means your GM rules, sure,
but also keep an eye on the players’ moves. It’s everyone’s responsibility to
watch for when a move has been triggered, including you. Stop the players and
ask if they mean to trigger the rules when it sounds like that’s what they’re
doing.

Part of following the rules is *making moves*. Your moves are different than
player moves and we’ll describe them in detail in a bit. Your moves are specific
things you can do to change the flow of the game.

In all of these things, *exploit your prep*. At times you’ll know something the
players don’t yet know. You can use that knowledge to help you make moves. Maybe
the wizard tries to cast a spell and draws unwanted attention. They don’t know
that the attention that just fell on them was the ominous gaze of a demon
waiting two levels below, but you do.
** Agenda
Your agenda makes up the things you aim to do at all times while GMing a game of
Dungeon World:
    - Portray a fantastic world
    - Fill the characters’ lives with adventure
    - Play to find out what happens
Everything you say and do at the table (and away from the table, too) exists to
accomplish these three goals and no others. Things that aren’t on this list
aren’t your goals. You’re not trying to beat the players or test their ability
to solve complex traps. You’re not here to give the players a chance to explore
your finely crafted setting. You’re not trying to kill the players (though
monsters might be). You’re most certainly not here to tell everyone a
planned-out story.

Your first agenda is to *portray a fantastic world*. Dungeon World is all about
guts, guile, and bravery against darkness and doom. It’s about characters who
have decided to take up a life of adventure in the hopes of some glorious
reward. It’s your job to participate in that by showing the players a world in
which their characters can find that adventure. Without the player characters
the world would fall into chaos or destruction—it might still even with them.
It’s up to you to portray the fantastic elements of that world. Show the players
the wonders of the world they’re in and encourage them to react to it.

*Filling the characters’ lives with adventure* means working with the players to
 create a world that’s engaging and dynamic. Adventurers are always caught up in
 some world-threatening danger or another—encourage and foster that kind of
 action in the game.

Dungeon World adventures *never* presume player actions. A Dungeon World
adventure portrays a setting in motion—someplace significant with creatures big
and small pursuing their own goals. As the players come into conflict with that
setting and its denizens, action is inevitable. You’ll honestly portray the
repercussions of that action.

This is how you *play to find out what happens*. You’re sharing in the fun of
finding out how the characters react to and change the world you’re portraying.
You’re all participants in a great adventure that’s unfolding. So really, don’t
plan too hard. The rules of the game will fight you. It’s fun to see how things
unfold, trust us.


** Principles
    - Draw maps, leave blanks
    - Address the characters, not the players
    - Embrace the fantastic
    - Make a move that follows
    - Never speak the name of your move
    - Give every monster life
    - Name every person
    - Ask questions and use the answers
    - Be a fan of the characters
    - Think dangerous
    - Begin and end with the fiction
    - Think offscreen, too
Your principles are your guides. Often, when it’s time to make a move, you’ll
already have an idea of what makes sense. Consider it in light of your
principles and go with it, if it fits.
**** Draw maps, leave blanks
Dungeon World exists mostly in the imaginations of the people playing it; maps
help everyone stay on the same page. You won’t always be drawing them yourself,
but any time there’s a new location described make sure it gets added to a map.

When you draw a map don’t try to make it complete. Leave room for the unknown.
As you play you’ll get more ideas and the players will give you inspiration to
work with. Let the maps expand and change.
**** Address the characters, not the players
Addressing the characters, not the players, means that you don’t say, “Tony, is
Dunwick doing something about that wight?” Instead you say, “Dunwick, what are
you doing about the wight?” Speaking this way keeps the game focused on the
fiction and not on the table. It’s important to the flow of the game, too. If
you talk to the players you may leave out details that are important to what
moves the characters make. Since moves are always based on the actions of the
character you need to think about what’s happening in terms of those
characters—not the players portraying them.
**** Embrace the fantastic
Magic, strange vistas, gods, demons, and abominations: the world is full of
mystery and magic. Embrace that in your prep and in play. Think about “the
fantastic” on various scales. Think about floating cities or islands crafted
from the corpse of a god. Think about village wise-men and their spirit
familiars or the statue that the local bandits touch to give them luck. The
characters are interesting people, empowered by their gods, their skill at arms,
or by mystical training. The world should be just as engaging.
**** Make a move that follows
When you make a move what you’re actually doing is taking an element of the
fiction and bringing it to bear against the characters. Your move should always
follow from the fiction. They help you focus on one aspect of the current
situation and do something interesting with it. What’s going on? What move makes
sense here?
**** Never speak the name of your move
There is no quicker way to ruin the consistency of Dungeon World than to tell
the players what move you’re making. Your moves are prompts to you, not things
you say directly.

You never show the players that you’re picking a move from a list. You know the
reason the slavers dragged off Omar was because you made the “put someone in a
spot” move, but you show it to the players as a straightforward outcome of their
actions, since it is.
**** Give every monster life
Monsters are fantastic creatures with their own motivations (simple or complex).
Give each monster details that bring it to life: smells, sights, sounds. Give
each one enough to make it real, but don’t cry when it gets beat up or
overthrown. That’s what player characters do!
**** Name every person
Anyone that the players speak with has a name. They probably have a personality
and some goals or opinions too, but you can figure that out as you go. Start
with a name. The rest can flow from there.
**** Ask questions and use the answers
Part of playing to find out what happens is explicitly not knowing everything,
and being curious. If you don’t know something, or you don’t have an idea, ask
the players and use what they say.

The easiest question to use is “What do you do?” Whenever you make a move, end
with “What do you do?” You don’t even have to ask the person you made the move
against. Take that chance to shift the focus elsewhere: “Rath’s spell is torn
apart with a flick of the mage’s wand. Finnegan, that spell was aiding you. What
are you doing now that it’s gone?”
**** Be a fan of the characters
Think of the players’ characters as protagonists in a story you might see on TV.
Cheer for their victories and lament their defeats. You’re not here to push them
in any particular direction, merely to participate in fiction that features them
and their action.
**** Think dangerous
Everything in the world is a target. You’re thinking like an evil overlord: no
single life is worth anything and there is nothing sacrosanct. Everything can be
put in danger, everything can be destroyed. Nothing you create is ever
protected. Whenever your eye falls on something you’ve created, think how it can
be put in danger, fall apart or crumble. The world changes. Without the
characters’ intervention, it changes for the worse.
**** Begin and end with the fiction
Everything you and the players do in Dungeon World comes from and leads to
fictional events. When the players make a move, they take a fictional action to
trigger it, apply the rules, and get a fictional effect. When you make a move it
always comes from the fiction.
**** Think offscreen too
Just because you’re a fan of the characters doesn’t mean everything happens
right in front of them. Sometimes your best move is in the next room, or another
part of the dungeon, or even back in town. Make your move elsewhere and show its
effects when they come into the spotlight.
** Moves
Whenever everyone looks to you to see what happens choose one of these. Each
move is something that occurs in the fiction of the game—they aren’t code words
or special terms. “Use up their resources” literally means to expend the
resources of the characters, for example.
    - Use a monster, danger, or location move
    - Reveal an unwelcome truth
    - Show signs of an approaching threat
    - Deal damage
    - Use up their resources
    - Turn their move back on them
    - Separate them
    - Give an opportunity that fits a class’ abilities
    - Show a downside to their class, race, or equipment
    - Offer an opportunity, with or without cost
    - Put someone in a spot
    - Tell them the requirements or consequences and ask
Never speak the name of your move (that’s one of your principles). Make it a
real thing that happens to them: “As you dodge the hulking ogre’s club, you slip
and land hard. Your sword goes sliding away into the darkness. You think you saw
where it went but the ogre is lumbering your way. What do you do?”

No matter what move you make, always follow up with “What do you do?” Your moves
are a way of fulfilling your agenda—part of which is to fill the characters’
lives with adventure. When a spell goes wild or the floor drops out from under
them adventurers react or suffer the consequences of inaction.
*** When to Make a Move
You make a move:
    - When everyone looks to you to find out what happens
    - When the players give you a golden opportunity
    - When they roll a 6-
Generally when the players are just looking at you to find out what happens you
make a soft move, otherwise you make a hard move.

A soft move is one without immediate, irrevocable consequences. That usually
means it’s something not all that bad, like revealing that there’s more treasure
if they can just find a way past the golem (offer an opportunity with cost). It
can also mean that it’s something bad, but they have time to avoid it, like
having the goblin archers loose their arrows (show signs of an approaching
threat) with a chance for them to dodge out of danger.

A soft move ignored becomes a golden opportunity for a hard move. If the players
do nothing about the hail of arrows flying towards them it’s a golden
opportunity to use the deal damage move.

Hard moves, on the other hand, have immediate consequences. Dealing damage is
almost always a hard move, since it means a loss of HP that won’t be recovered
without some action from the players.

When you have a chance to make a hard move you can opt for a soft one instead if
it better fits the situation. Sometimes things just work out for the best.
*** Choosing a Move
To choose a move, start by looking at the obvious consequences of the action
that triggered it. If you already have an idea, think on it for a second to make
sure it fits your agenda and principles and then do it. *Let your moves
snowball*. Build on the success or failure of the characters’ moves and on your
own previous moves.

If your first instinct is that this won’t hurt them now, but it’ll come back to
bite them later, great! That’s part of your principles (think offscreen too).
Make a note of and reveal it when the time is right.
*** Making your Move
When making a move, keep your principles in mind. In particular, never speak the
name of your move and address the characters, not the players. Your moves are
not mechanical actions happening around the table. They are concrete events
happening to the characters in the fictional world you are describing.

Note that “deal damage” is a move, but other moves may include damage as well.
When an ogre flings you against a wall you take damage as surely as if he had
smashed you with his fists.

After every move you make, always ask “What do you do?”
**** Use a monster, danger, or location move
Every monster in an adventure has moves associated with it, as do many
locations. A monster or location move is just a description of what that
location or monster does, maybe “hurl someone away” or “bridge the planes.” If a
player move (like hack and slash) says that a monster gets to make an attack,
make an aggressive move with that monster.

The overarching dangers of the adventure also have moves associated with them.
Use these moves to bring that danger into play, which may mean more monsters.
**** Reveal an unwelcome truth
An unwelcome truth is a fact the players wish wasn’t true: that the room’s been
trapped, maybe, or that the helpful goblin is actually a spy. Reveal to the
players just how much trouble they’re in.
**** Show signs of an approaching threat
This is one of your most versatile moves. “Threat” means anything bad that’s on
the way. With this move, you just show them that something’s going to happen
unless they do something about it.
**** Deal damage
When you deal damage, choose one source of damage that’s fictionally threatening
a character and apply it. In combat with a lizard man? It stabs you. Triggered a
trap? Rocks fall on you.

The amount of damage is decided by the source. In some cases, this move might
involve trading damage both ways, with the character also dealing damage.

Most damage is based on a die roll. When a player takes damage, tell them what
to roll. You never need to touch the dice. If the player is too cowardly to find
out their own fate, they can ask another player to roll for them.
**** Use up their resources
Surviving in a dungeon, or anywhere dangerous, often comes down to supplies.
With this move, something happens to use up some resource: weapons, armor,
healing, ongoing spells. You don’t always have to use it up permanently. A sword
might just be flung to the other side of the room, not shattered.
**** Turn Their Move Back On Them
Think about the benefits a move might grant a character and turn them around in
a negative way. Alternately, grant the same advantage to someone who has it out
for the characters. If Ivy has learned of Duke Horst’s men approaching from the
east, maybe a scout has spotted her, too.
**** Separate Them
There are few things worse than being in the middle of a raging battle with
blood-thirsty owlbears on all sides—one of those things is being in the middle
of that battle with no one at your back.

Separating the characters can mean anything from being pushed apart in the heat
of battle to being teleported to the far end of the dungeon. Whatever way it
occurs, it’s bound to cause problems.
**** Give an opportunity that fits a class’ abilities
The thief disables traps, sneaks, and picks locks. The cleric deals with the
divine and the dead. Every class has things that they shine at—present an
opportunity that plays to what one class shines at.

It doesn’t have to be a class that’s in play right now though. Sometimes a
locked door stands between you and treasure and there’s no thief in sight. This
is an invitation for invention, bargaining, and creativity. If all you’ve got is
a bloody axe doesn’t every problem look like a skull?
**** Show a downside to their class, race, or equipment
Just as every class shines, they all have their weaknesses too. Do orcs have a
special thirst for elven blood? Is the cleric’s magic disturbing dangerous
forces? The torch that lights the way also draws attention from eyes in the
dark.
**** Offer an opportunity, with or without cost
Show them something they want: riches, power, glory. If you want, you can
associate some cost with it too, of course.

Remember to lead with the fiction. You don’t say, “This area isn’t dangerous so
you can make camp here, if you’re willing to take the time.” You make it a solid
fictional thing and say, “Helferth’s blessings still hang around the shattered
altar. It’s a nice safe spot, but the chanting from the ritual chamber is
getting louder. What do you do?”
**** Put someone in a spot
A spot is someplace where a character needs to make tough choices. Put them, or
something they care about, in the path of destruction. The harder the choice,
the tougher the spot.
**** Tell them the requirements or consequences and ask
This move is particularly good when they want something that’s not covered by a
move, or they’ve failed a move. They can do it, sure, but they’ll have to pay
the price. Or, they can do it, but there will be consequences. Maybe they can
swim through the shark-infested moat before being devoured, but they’ll need a
distraction. Of course, this is made clear to the characters, not just the
players: the sharks are in a starved frenzy, for example.
** Dungeon Moves
Dungeon Moves are a special subset that are used to make or alter a dungeon on
the fly. Use these if your players are exploring a hostile area that you don’t
already have planned completely.

Map out the area being explored as you make these moves. Most of them will
require you to add a new room or element to your map.
    - Change the environment
    - Point to a looming threat
    - Introduce a new faction or type of creature
    - Use a threat from an existing faction or type of creature
    - Make them backtrack
    - Present riches at a price
    - Present a challenge to one of the characters
You can make these moves whenever everyone looks to you to say something, when
the players present you an opportunity, or when the players miss on a roll.
They’re particularly well-suited for when the characters enter a new room or
hallway and want to know what they find there.
**** Change the environment
The environment is the general feel of the area the players are in: carved
tunnels, warped trees, safe trails, or whatever else. This is your opportunity
to introduce them to a new environment: the tunnels gradually become naturally
carved, the trees are dead and strange, or the trails are lost and the
wilderness takes over. Use this move to vary the types of areas and creatures
the players will face.
**** Point to a looming threat
If you know that something is lurking and waiting for the players to stumble
upon it, this move shows them the signs and clues. This move is the dragon’s
footprints in the mud or the slimy trail of the gelatinous cube.
**** Introduce a new faction or type of creature
A type of creature is a broad grouping: orcs, goblins, lizardmen, the undead,
etc.

A faction is a group of creatures united by a similar goal. Once you introduce
them you can begin to make moves and cause trouble for the players with those
creatures or NPCs.

Introducing means giving some clear sensory evidence or substantiated
information. Don’t be coy; the players should have some idea what you’re showing
the presence of. You can, however, be subtle in your approach. No need to have
the cultist overlord waving a placard and screaming in the infernal tongue every
single time.

A hard application of this move will snowball directly into a combat scene or
ambush.
**** Use a threat from an existing faction or type of creature
Once the characters have been introduced to the presence of a faction or type of
creature you can use moves of monsters of that type.

Use the factions and types broadly. Orcs are accompanied with their hunting
worgs. A mad cult probably has some undead servants or maybe a few beasts
summoned from the abyssal pits. This is a move that, often, you’ll be making
subconsciously—it’s just implementing the tools you’ve set out for yourself in a
clear and effective manner.
**** Make them backtrack
Look back at the spaces you’ve added to the map. Is there anything useful there
as yet undiscovered? Can you add a new obstacle that can only be overcome by
going back there? Is there a locked door here and now whose key lies in an
earlier room?

When backtracking, show the effect that time has had on the areas they’ve left
behind. What new threats have sprung up in their wake? What didn’t they take
care of that’s waiting for their return?

Use this move the make the dungeon a living, breathing place. There is no stasis
in the wake of the characters’ passing. Add reinforcements, cave in walls, cause
chaos. The dungeon evolves in the wake of the characters’ actions.
**** Present riches at a price
What do the players want? What would they sacrifice for it?

Put some desirable item just out of reach. Find something they’re short on:
time, HP, gear, whatever. Find a way to make what they want available if they
give up what they have.

The simplest way to use this move is the promise of gold out of the way of the
main objective. Will they stop to pry the ruby eyes from the idol when they know
that the sacrifice looms closer and closer? Use this move and you can find out.
**** Present a challenge to one of the characters
Challenge a character by looking at what they’re good at. Give the thief a lock
to pick, show the cleric servants of an enemy god to battle against. Give the
wizard magical mysteries to investigate. Show the fighter some skulls to crack.
Give someone a chance to shine.

As an alternative, challenge a character by looking at what they’re bad at or
what they’ve left unresolved. If the bard has a complicated lie on his
conscience, what steps will he take to cover it up when someone figures him out?
If the wizard has been summoning demons, what happens when word gets out?

This move can give a character the spotlight—even if just for a moment. Try to
give everyone a chance to be the focus of play using this move from session to
session.
** Dealing With Common Situations
There are some common situations that come up in Dungeon World. Here’s how to
deal with them.
**** Fights
Sooner or later blades are drawn and blood is shed. When this happens the
players are likely to start hacking and slashing, volleying, and defending.
Think about more than just the exchange of damage. Monsters might be trying to
capture the characters or protect something from them. Understand what the fight
is about; what each side wants and how that might affect the tide of battle.

No self-respecting monster just stands still for their beating. Combat is a
dynamic thing with creatures moving in and out of range, taking cover, and
retreating. Sometimes the battlefield itself shifts. Have your monsters take
action that the players will react to. Make sure you’re making use of moves
beyond deal damage, even in a fight.

Make sure everyone has a chance to act, and that you know where each player is
during the chaos of combat. Make a map of a complex battle location so that
everyone knows just what’s happening and can describe their actions
appropriately.
**** Traps
Traps may come from your prep, or you can improvise them based on your moves. If
nothing has established that the location is safe, traps are always an option.

The players may find traps through clever plans, trap sense, or discerning
realities. If a character describes an action that doesn’t trigger a move, but
the action would still discover a trap, don’t hide it from them. Traps aren’t
allowed to break the rules.
**** People
Dwarven smiths, elven sages, humans of all shapes and sizes occupy the world
around the characters. They’re not mindless stooges to be pushed around but
they’re not what we’re playing to find out about either. The NPCs are people:
they have goals and the tools to struggle towards those goals. Use them to
illustrate what the world is like. Show your players the common people
struggling for recognition or the noble classes seeking to uplift their people.
Some whole adventures might take place in a peopled environment rather than an
isolated dungeon. Some classes, the bard in particular, are adept at
manipulating and using people as resources. Don’t shy away from these
situations. Be a fan of these characters, giving them interesting, nuanced
people to interact with.

People, just like dungeons, change over time. The passing of the characters
through their lives might inspire or enrage them. The characters’ actions will
cause the world to change, for good or ill, and the people they meet with will
remember these changes. When the characters roll back through a town they were
less-than-kind to on their previous visit, show them how the people are
different now. Are they more cautious? Have they taken up a new religion? Are
they hungry for revenge?

Relationships between characters are represented by the bonds but relationships
with NPCs are more tenuous. If the players want to make real, lasting
connections with the people of the world, they need to act. Remember, “what do
you do?” is as valid a question when faced with the hopes and fears of a
potential new ally or enemy as it is when staring down the business end of a
longsword.

* First Session
The first session of a game of Dungeon World begins with character creation.
Character creation is also world creation, the details on the character sheets
and the questions that you ask establish what Dungeon World is like—who lives in
it and what’s going on.

This section is for the GM so it’s addressed to you—the GM. For the players, the
first session is just like every other. They just have to play their characters
like real people and explore Dungeon World. You have to do a little more in the
first session. You establish the world and the threats the players will face.
** Prep
Before the first session, you’ll need to print some stuff. Print off:
    - A few copies of the basic moves
    - One copy of each class sheet, double-sided
    - One copy each of the cleric and wizard spell sheets, double-sided
    - The GM sheet
You’ll also need to read this whole book, especially the sections on GMing (GM
moves) and the basic moves. It’s a good idea to be acquainted with the class
moves too, so you can be prepared for them. Be especially sure to read the rules
for fronts, but don’t create any yet.

Think about fantastic worlds, strange magic, and foul beasts. Remember the games
you played and the stories you told. Watch some movies, read some comics; get
heroic fantasy into your brain.

What you bring to the first session, ideas-wise, is up to you. At the very least
bring your head full of ideas. That’s the bare minimum.

If you like you can plan a little more. Maybe think of an evil plot and who’s
behind it, or some monsters you’d like to use.

If you’ve got some spare time on your hands you can even draw some maps (but
remember, from your principles: leave blanks) and imagine specific locations.

The one thing you absolutely can’t bring to the table is a planned storyline or
plot. You don’t know the heroes or the world before you sit down to play so
planning anything concrete is just going to frustrate you. It also conflicts
with your agenda: play to find out what happens.
*** Getting Started
When everyone shows up for the first session briefly introduce Dungeon World to
anyone who hasn’t played before. Cover the mechanical basis of moves. Introduce
the character classes, help players pick their classes, and walk them through
character creation.

Your role during character creation is threefold: help everyone, ask questions,
and take notes. When a player makes a choice—particularly for their bonds—ask
them about it. Get more detail. Think about what these details mean.

You should also set expectations: the players are to play their characters as
people—skilled adventurers delving into dangerous places, but real people. Your
role is to play the rest of the world as a dynamic, changing place.

Some questions commonly come up during character creation. You should be ready
to answer them:

/Are the characters friends?/ No, not necessarily, but they do work together as
a team for common goals. Their reasons for pursuing those goals may be
different, but they manage to work together.

/Are there other wizards?/ Not really. There are other workers of arcane magic,
and the common folk may call them wizards, but they’re not like you. They don’t
have the same abilities, though they may be similar. Later on there may be
another player character with the same class but no GM character will ever
really be a wizard (or any other class).

/What’s coin?/ Coin’s the currency of the realm. It’s good pretty much
everywhere. It’ll buy you mundane stuff, like steel swords and wooden staves.
The special stuff, like magic weapons, isn’t for sale. Not for coin, anyway…

/Is the GM trying to kill us?/ No. The GM’s job is to portray the world and the
things in it and the world is a very dangerous place. You might die. That
doesn’t mean the GM is out to get you.

During this entire process, especially character creation, ask questions. Look
for interesting facts established by the characters’ bonds, moves, classes, and
descriptions and ask about those things. Be curious! When someone mentions the
demons that slaughtered their village find out more about them. After all, you
don’t have anything (except maybe a dungeon) and everything they give you is
fuel for future adventures.

Also pay attention to the players’ questions. When mechanical questions come up
answer them. When questions of setting or fiction come up your best bet is to
turn those questions around. When a player says, “Who is the King of Torsea,”
say, “I don’t know. Who is it? What is he like?” Collaborate with your players.
Asking a question means it’s something that interests them so work with them to
make the answers interesting. Don’t be afraid to say, “I don’t know” and ask
them the same questions. Work together to find a fantastic and interesting
answer.

If you’ve come to the table with some ideas about stuff you’d like to see in the
world, share them with the players. Their characters are their responsibility
and the world is yours—you’ve got a lot of say in what lives in it. If you want
the game to be about a hunt for the lost sorcerer-race of aeons past, say so! If
the players aren’t interested or they’re sick to death of sorcerers, they’ll let
you know and you can work together to find some other way. You don’t need
pre-approval for everything but making sure everyone is excited about the broad
strokes of the world is a great start.

Once everyone has their characters created you can take a deep breath. Look back
over the questions you’ve asked and answered so far. You should have some notes
that will point you towards what the game might look like. Look at what the
players have brought to the table. Look to the ideas that’ve been stewing away
in your head. It’s time for the adventure to begin!
*** The First Adventure
The first adventure is really about discovering the direction that future
sessions will take. Throughout the first adventure keep your eye out for
unresolved threats; note dangerous things that are mentioned but not dealt with.
These will be fuel for sessions to come.

Start the session with a group of player characters (maybe all of them) in a
tense situation. Use anything that demands action: outside the entrance to a
dungeon, ambushed in a fetid swamp, peeking through the crack in a door at the
orc guards, or being sentenced before King Levus. Ask questions right away—“who
is leading the ambush against you?” or “what did you do to make King Levus so
mad?” If the situation stems directly from the characters and your questions,
all the better.

Here’s where the game starts. The players will start saying and doing things,
which means they’ll start making moves. For the first session you should watch
especially carefully for when moves apply, until the players get the hang of it.
Often, in the early sessions, the players will be most comfortable just
narrating their actions—this is fine. When a move triggers let them know. Say,
“It sounds like you’re trying to…” and then walk them through the move. Players
looking for direction will look to their character sheet. When a player just
says “I hack and slash him” be quick to ask, “so what are you actually doing?”
Ask “How?” or “With what?”

For the first session, you have a few specific goals:
    - Establish details, describe
    - Use what they give you
    - Ask questions
    - Leave blanks
    - Look for interesting facts
    - Help the players understand the moves
    - Give each character a chance to shine
    - Introduce NPCs
**** Establish details, describe
All the ideas and visions in your head don’t really exist in the fiction of the
game until you share them, describe them, and detail them. The first session is
the time to establish the basics of what things look like, who’s in charge, what
they wear, what the world is like, what the immediate location is like. Describe
everything but keep it brief enough to expand on later. Use a detail or two to
make a description really stand out as real.
**** Use what they give you
The best part of the first session is you don’t have to come with anything
concrete. You might have a dungeon sketched out but the players provide the real
meat—use it. They’ll emerge from the darkness of that first dungeon and when
they do and their eyes adjust to the light, you’ll have built up an exciting
world to explore with their help. Look at their bonds, their moves, how they
answer your questions and use what you find to fill in the world around the
characters.
**** Ask questions
You’re using what they give you, right? What if you need more? That’s when you
draw it out by asking questions. Poke and prod about specific things. Ask for
reactions: “What does Lux think about that?” “Is Avon doing something about it?”

If you ever find yourself at a loss, pause for a second and ask a question. Ask
one character a question about another. When a character does something, ask how
a different character feels or reacts. Questions will power your game and make
it feel real and exciting. Use the answers you find to fill in what might happen
next.
**** Leave blanks
This is one of your principles, but it’s especially true during the first
session. Every blank is another cool thing waiting to happen; leave yourself a
stock of them.
**** Look for interesting facts
There are some ideas that, when you hear them, just jump out at you. When you
hear one of those ideas, just write it down. When a player mentions the Duke of
Sorrows being the demon he bargained with, note it. That little fact is the seed
for a whole world.
**** Help the players understand the moves
You’ve already read the game, the players may not have, so it’s up to you to
help them if they need it. The fact is, they likely won’t need it much. All they
have to do is describe what their character does, the rules take care of the
rest.

The one place they may need some help is remembering the triggers for the moves.
Keep an ear out for actions that trigger moves, like attacking in melee or
consulting their knowledge. After a few moves the players will likely remember
them on their own.
**** Give each character a chance to shine
As a fan of the heroes (remember your agenda?) you want to see them do what they
do best. Give them a chance at this, not by tailoring every room to their
skills, but by portraying a fantastic world (agenda again) where there are many
solutions to every challenge.
**** Introduce NPCs
NPCs bring the world to life. If every monster does nothing more than attack and
every blacksmith sets out their wares for simple payment the world is dead.
Instead give your characters, especially those that the players show an interest
in, life (principles, remember?). Introduce NPCs but don’t protect them. The
recently deceased Lord of Goblins is just as useful for future adventures as the
one who’s still alive.
** After the First Session
Once you’re done with the first session take some time to relax. Let ideas
ferment. Don’t rush into the next session.

Once you’ve had some time to relax and think over the first session it’s time to
prepare for the next session. Preparing for the second session takes a few
minutes, maybe an hour if this is your first time. You’ll create fronts, maybe
make some monsters or custom moves, and generally get an idea of what is going
on in the world.
* Fronts
Fronts are secret tomes of GM knowledge. Each is a collection of linked
dangers—threats to the characters specifically and to the people, places, and
things the characters care about. It also includes one or more impending dooms,
the horrible things that will happen without the characters’ intervention.
“Fronts” comes, of course, from “fighting on two fronts” which is just where you
want the characters to be—surrounded by threats, danger and adventure.

Fronts are built outside of active play. They’re the solo fun that you get to
have between games—rubbing your hands and cackling evilly to yourself as you
craft the foes with which to challenge your PCs. You may tweak or adjust your
fronts during play (who knows when inspiration will strike?) but the meat of
them comes from preparation between sessions.

Fronts are designed to help you organize your thoughts on what opposes the
players. They’re here to contain your notes, ideas, and plans for these opposing
forces. When you’re in a bind your fronts are where you’re going to turn and
say, “Oh, so /that’s/ what I should do.” Consider them an organizational tool,
as inspiration for present and future mayhem.

When you’re building fronts, think about all the creepy dungeon denizens, the
rampaging hordes and ancient cults that you’d like to see in your game. Think in
broad strokes at first and then, as you build dangers into your fronts, you’ll
be able to narrow those ideas down. When you write your campaign front, think
about session-to-session trends. When you write your adventure fronts, think
about what’s important right here and right now. When you’re done writing a few
fronts you’ll be equipped with all the tools you’ll need to challenge your
players and ready to run Dungeon World.
*** When to Make Fronts
You’ll make your campaign front and first adventure fronts /after/ your first
session. Your campaign front may not be complete when you first make it—that’s
great! Just like blanks on a map, unknown parts of your campaign front are
opportunities for future creativity.

After that first session you’ll also make some adventure fronts. One or two is
usually a good number. If you find yourself with more adventure fronts consider
leaving some possible fronts as just notes for now.
*** Campaign and Adventure Fronts
At their core, all fronts contain the same components. They sort and gather your
dangers into easy-to-use clusters. There are, however, two different /kinds/ of
fronts available to you. On the session-to-session level there are your
adventure fronts. These fronts will see use for a few sessions each. They’re
tied to one problem and will be dealt with or cast aside as the characters
wander the dungeon or uncover the plot at hand. Think of them as episodic
content: “Today, on Dungeon World…”

Tying your adventure fronts together is your campaign front. While the adventure
fronts will contain immediate dangers—the orcs in Hargrosh Pass, say—the
campaign front contains the Dark God Grishkar who drives the orcs to their
pillaging. The campaign front is the unifying element that spans all the
sessions of your Dungeon World game. It will have slower-burning portents but
they’ll be bigger in scope and have a deeper impact on the world. Most
importantly they’ll be scarier if they’re allowed to resolve.

When a danger from an adventure front goes without resolution you’ll have to
make a decision. If the danger is something you like and feel has a place in the
larger world of your game don’t hesitate to move it to the campaign front.
You’re able to make smaller dangers that went unresolved into bigger dangers
some day later on. You can move dangers from the campaign fronts to an adventure
front if they’ve come to bear, too.
** Creating Fronts
Here’s how a front comes together:
    - Choose campaign front or adventure front
    - Create 2-3 dangers
    - Choose an impending doom for each danger
    - Add grim portents (1-3 for an adventure front, 3-5 for the campaign front)
    - Write 1–3 stakes questions
    - List the general cast of the front
** Creating Dangers
Not every element of your game will warrant a danger—traps, some roving
monsters, and other bits of ephemera may just be there to add context but aren’t
important enough to warrant inclusion. That’s okay. Fronts are here to keep you
apprised of the bigger picture. Dangers are divided into a handful of
categories, each with its own name and *impulse*.

Every danger has a crucial motivation that drives it called its impulse. The
impulse exists to help you understand that danger. What pushes it to fulfill its
impending doom? Impulses can help you translate the danger into action.

When creating dangers for your front, think about how each one interacts as a
facet of the front as a whole. Keep in mind the people, places, and things that
might be a part of the threat to the world that the front represents. How does
each danger contribute to the front?
Let’s say we have an idea for a front—an ancient portal has been discovered in
the icy north. We’ll call our front “The Opening of the White Gate.”
The easiest place to start is with people and monsters. Cultists, ogre
chieftains, demonic overlords, and the like are all excellent dangers. These are
the creatures that have risen above mere monster status to become serious
threats on their own. Groups of monsters can be dangers too—goblin tribes or a
rampaging centaur khanate, for example.
For the front we’re creating, we can pick a few different groups or people who
might be interested in the gate. The College of Arcanists, perhaps. There’s a
golem, too, we’ve decided, that protects the forgotten portal. The golem is just
an obstacle, so we won’t make him a danger.
Thinking more broadly, less obvious elements of the world can be dangers.
Blasted landscapes, intelligent magical items, ancient spells woven into the
fabric of time. These things fulfill the same purposes as a mad
necromancer—they’re part of the front, a danger to the world.
For our front, we’ll add the gate itself as a danger.
Lastly, if we think ahead, we can include some overarching dangers. The sorts of
things that are in play outside the realm of the obvious—godly patrons, hidden
conspiracies and cursed prophecies waiting to be fulfilled.
Perhaps the White Gate was carved in the ancient past, hidden by a race of
angels until the Day of Judgement. We’ll add the Argent Seraphim to our front as
a new danger.
There’s always more dangers you could add to a front, but limit yourself to 3 at
most and leave room for discovery. Like a map, blank spaces can always be filled
in later. Leaving room for player contribution and future inspiration means
you’ll have freedom to alter the front and make it fit the game. Not every bad
thing that could happen deserves to be made into a danger. If you’re uncertain,
think about it this way: dangers can always get worse.
A barbarian tribe near the gate, the frozen tundra itself, a band of rival
adventurers; all these things could be dangerous elements of the game but
they’re not important enough just yet to deserve to be dangers.
Creating dangers is a way to slice up your overall front concept into smaller,
easier to manage pieces. Dangers are tools for adding detail to the right parts
of the front and for making the front easier to manage in the long run.

Once you’ve named and added a danger to the front you need to choose a type for
that danger from the list below. Alternately, you can use the list of types to
inspire dangers: with your front in mind, peruse the list and pick one or two
that fit.
For our three dangers (The College of Arcanists, The White Gate and the Argent
Seraphim) we’ve selected Cabal, Dark Portal and Choir of Angels, respectively.
** Types of Dangers
    - Ambitious Organizations
    - Planar Forces
    - Arcane Enemies
    - Hordes
    - Cursed Places
*** Ambitious Organizations
    - Misguided Good (/impulse: to do what is “right” no matter the cost/)
    - Thieves Guild (/impulse: to take by subterfuge/)
    - Cult (/impulse: to infest from within/)
    - Religious Organization (/impulse: to establish and follow doctrine/)
    - Corrupt Government (/impulse: to maintain the status quo/)
    - Cabal (/impulse: to absorb those in power, to grow/)
**** GM Moves for Ambitious Organizations
    - Attack someone by stealthy means (kidnapping, etc.)
    - Attack someone directly (with a gang or single assailant)
    - Absorb or buy out someone important (an ally, perhaps)
    - Influence a powerful institution (change a law, manipulate doctrine)
    - Establish a new rule (within the organization)
    - Claim territory or resources
    - Negotiate a deal
    - Observe a potential foe in great detail
*** Planar Forces
    - God (/impulse: to gather worshippers/)
    - Demon Prince (/impulse: to open the gates of Hell/)
    - Elemental Lord (/impulse: to tear down creation to its component parts/)
    - Force of Chaos (/impulse: to destroy all semblance of order/)
    - Choir of Angels (/impulse: to pass judgement/)
    - Construct of Law (/impulse: to eliminate perceived disorder/)
**** GM Moves for Planar Forces
    - Turn an organization (corrupt or infiltrate with influence)
    - Give dreams of prophecy
    - Lay a Curse on a foe
    - Extract a promise in exchange for a boon
    - Attack indirectly, through intermediaries
    - Rarely, when the stars are right, attack directly
    - Foster rivalries with other, similar powers
    - Expose someone to a Truth, wanted or otherwise
*** Arcane Enemies
    - Lord of the Undead (/impulse: to seek true immortality/)
    - Power-mad Wizard (/impulse: to seek magical power/)
    - Sentient Artifact (/impulse: to find a worthy wielder/)
    - Ancient Curse (/impulse: to ensnare/)
    - Chosen One (/impulse: to fulfill or resent their destiny/)
    - Dragon (/impulse: to hoard gold and jewels, to protect the clutch/)
**** GM Moves for Arcane Enemies
    - Learn forbidden knowledge
    - Cast a spell over time and space
    - Attack a foe with magic, directly or otherwise
    - Spy on someone with a scrying spell
    - Recruit a follower or toady
    - Tempt someone with promises
    - Demand a sacrifice
*** Hordes
    - Wandering Barbarians (/impulse: to grow strong, to drive their enemies
      before them/)
    - Humanoid Vermin (/impulse: to breed, to multiply and consume/)
    - Underground Dwellers (/impulse: to defend the complex from outsiders/)
    - Plague of the Undead (/impulse: to spread/)
**** GM Moves for Hordes
    - Assault a bastion of civilization
    - Embrace internal chaos
    - Change direction suddenly
    - Overwhelm a weaker force
    - Perform a show of dominance
    - Abandon an old home, find a new one
    - Grow in size by breeding or conquest
    - Appoint a champion
    - Declare war and act upon that declaration without hesitation or
      deliberation
*** Cursed Places
    - Abandoned Tower (/impulse: to draw in the weak-willed/)
    - Unholy Ground (/impulse: to spawn evil/)
    - Elemental Vortex (/impulse: to grow, to tear apart reality/)
    - Dark Portal (/impulse: to disgorge demons/)
    - Shadowland (/impulse: to corrupt or consume the living/)
    - Place of Power (/impulse: to be controlled or tamed/)
**** GM Moves for Cursed Places
    - Vomit forth a lesser monster
    - Spread to an adjacent place
    - Lure someone in
    - Grow in intensity or depth
    - Leave a lingering effect on an inhabitant or visitor
    - Hide something from sight
    - Offer power
    - Dampen magic or increase its effects
    - Confuse or obfuscate truth or direction
    - Corrupt a natural law
*** Description and Cast
Write up something short to remind you just what this danger is about, something
to describe it in a nutshell. Don’t worry about where it’s going or what could
happen—grim portents and the impending doom will handle that for you; you’ll get
to those in a bit. If there are multiple people involved in the danger (an orc
warlord and his clansmen, a hateful god and his servants) go ahead and give them
names and a detail or two now. Leave yourself some space as you’ll be adding to
this section as you play.
*** Custom Moves
Sometimes a danger will suggest a move that isn’t covered by any existing ones.
You can write custom moves to fill the gaps or to add the right effects for the
danger. They can be player moves or GM moves, as you see fit. Of course, if
you’re writing a player move, keep your hands off the dice and mind the basic
structure of a move. A 10+ is a complete success, while a 7–9 is a partial
success. On a miss, maybe the custom move does something specific, or maybe
not—maybe you just get to make a move or work towards fulfilling a grim portent.
The formatting of these moves varies from move to move.
For the Opening of the White Gate, I just know some fool PC is going to end up
in the light that spills from the gate, so I’m writing a move to show what might
occur.
When you *stand in the presence of the Light From Beyond*, roll+WIS: ✴On a 10+
you are judged worthy, the Argent Seraphim will grant you a vision or boon. ✴On
a 7-9 you are under suspicion and see a vision of what dark fate might befall
you if you do not correct your ways. ✴On a miss, thou art weighed in the balance
and art found wanting.
*** Grim Portents
Grim portents are dark designs for what could happen if a danger goes unchecked.
Think about what would happen if the danger existed in the world but the PCs
didn’t—if all these awful things you’ve conjured up had their run of the world.
Scary, huh? The grim portents are your way to codify the plans and machinations
of your dangers. A grim portent can be a single interesting event or a chain of
steps. When you’re not sure what to do next, push your danger towards resolving
a grim portent.

More often than not grim portents have a logical order. The orcs tear down the
city only after the peace talks fail, for example. A simple front will progress
from bad to worse to much worse in a clear path forward. Sometimes, grim
portents are unconnected pathways to the impending doom. The early
manifestations of danger might not all be related. It’s up to you to decide how
complex your front will be. Whenever a danger comes to pass, check the other
dangers in the front. In a complex front, you may need to cross off or alter the
grim portents. That’s fine, you’re allowed. Keep scale in mind, too. Grim
portents don’t all have to be world-shaking. They can simply represent a change
in direction for a danger. Some new way for it to cause trouble in the world.

Think of your grim portents as possible moves waiting in the wings. When the
time is right, unleash them on the world.
I’ve chosen a few grim portents for my new front.
    - The College sends an expedition to the Gate
    - The Key is discovered
    - The First Trumpet sounds
    - A Champion is chosen
    - The Second Trumpet sounds
    - The Herald appears
    - The Gate is Opened
When a grim portent comes to pass, check it off—the prophecy has come true! A
grim portent that has come to pass might have ramifications for your other
fronts, too. Have a quick look when your players aren’t demanding your attention
and feel free to make changes. One small grim portent may resound across the
whole campaign in subtle ways.

You can advance a grim portent descriptively or prescriptively. Descriptively
means that you’ve seen the change happen during play, so you mark it off. Maybe
the players sided with the goblin tribes against their lizardman enemies—now the
goblins control the tunnels. Lo and behold, this was the next step in a grim
portent. Prescriptive is when, due to a failed player move or a golden
opportunity, you advance the grim portent as your hard move. That step comes to
pass, show its effects and keep on asking, “What do you do, now?”
*** Impending Doom
At the end of every danger’s path is an impending doom. This is the final toll
of the bell that signals the danger’s triumphant resolution. When a grim portent
comes to pass the impending doom grows stronger, more apparent and present in
the world. These are the very bad things that every danger, in some way, seeks
to bring into effect. Choose one of the types of impending dooms and give it a
concrete form in your front. These often change in play, as the characters
meddle in the affairs of the world. Don’t fret, you can change them later.
    - Tyranny (of the strong over the weak or the few over the many)
    - Pestilence (the spread of sickness and disease, the end of wellness)
    - Destruction (apocalypse, ruin and woe)
    - Usurpation (the chain of order comes apart, someone rightful is displaced)
    - Impoverishment (enslavement, the abandonment of goodness and right)
    - Rampant Chaos (laws of reality, of society, or any order is dissolved)

When all of the grim portents of a danger come to pass, the impending doom sets
in. The danger is then resolved but the setting has changed in some meaningful
way. This will almost certainly change the front at large as well. Making sure
that these effects reverberate throughout the world is a big part of making them
feel real.
*** Stakes
Your stakes questions are 1-3 questions about people, places, or groups that
you’re interested in. People include PCs and NPCs, your choice. Remember that
your agenda includes “Play to find out what happens?” Stakes are a way of
reminding yourself what you want to find out.

Stakes are concrete and clear. Don’t write stakes about vague feelings or
incremental changes. Stakes are about important changes that affect the PCs and
the world. A good stakes question is one that, when it’s resolved, means that
things will never be the same again.

The most important thing about stakes is that you find them interesting. Your
stakes should be things that you genuinely want to know, but that you’re also
willing to leave to be resolved through play. Once you’ve written it as a stake,
it’s out of your hands, you don’t get to just make it up anymore. Now you have
to play to find out.

Playing to find out is one of the biggest rewards of playing Dungeon World.
You’ve written down something tied to events happening in the world that you
want to find out about—now you get to do just that.

Once you have your stakes your front is ready to play.
My stakes questions include, as tailored to my group:
    - Who will be the champion?
    - How will Lux respond to the Light From Beyond?
    - Will the College be able to recruit Avon?
** Resolving a Front
Often a front will be resolved in a simple and straightforward manner. A front
representing a single dungeon may have its dangers killed, turned to good, or
overcome by some act of heroism. In this case the front is dissolved and set
aside. Maybe there are elements of the front—dangers that go unresolved or
leftover members of a danger that’s been cleared—that live on. Maybe they move
to the campaign front as brand new dangers?

The campaign front will need a bit more effort to resolve. It’ll be working
slowly and subtly as the course of the campaign rolls along. You won’t introduce
or resolve it all at once, but in pieces. The characters work towards defeating
the various minions of the big bad that lives in your campaign front. In the
end, though, you’ll know that the campaign front is resolved when the Dark God
is confronted or the undead plague claims the world and the heroes emerge
bloodied but victorious or defeated and despairing. Campaign fronts take longer
to deal with but in the end they’re the most satisfying to resolve.

When a front is resolved take some extra time to sit down and look at the
aftermath. Did any grim portents come to pass? Even if a danger is stopped, if
any grim portents are fulfilled, the world is changed, if only in subtle ways.
Keep this in mind when you write your future fronts. Is there anyone who could
be moved from the now-defeated front to somewhere else? Anyone get promoted or
reduced in stature? The resolution of a front is an important event!

When you resolve an adventure front usually that means the adventure itself has
been resolved. This is a great time to take a break and look at your campaign
front. Let it inspire your next adventure front. Write up a new adventure front
or polish off one you’ve been working on, draw a few maps to go with it and get
ready for the next big thing.
** Multiple Adventure Fronts
As you start your campaign you’re likely to have a lightly detailed campaign
front and one or two detailed adventure fronts. Characters may choose, part-way
through an adventure, to pursue some other course. You might end up with a
handful of partly-resolved adventure fronts. Not only is this okay, it’s a great
way to explore a world that feels alive and organic. Always remember, fronts
continue along apace no matter whether the characters are there to see them or
not. Think offscreen, especially where fronts are concerned.

When running two adventure fronts at the same time they can be intertwined or
independent. The anarchists corrupting the city from the inside are a different
front from the orcs massing outside the walls, but they’d both be in play at
once. On the other hand one dungeon could have multiple fronts at play within
its walls: the powers and effects of the cursed place itself and the warring
humanoid tribes that inhabit it.

A situation warrants multiple adventure fronts when there are multiple impending
dooms, all equally potent but not necessarily related. The impending doom of the
anarchists is chaos in the city, the impending doom of the orcs is its utter
ruination. They are two separate fronts with their own dangers. They’ll deal
with each other, as well, so there’s some room for the players choosing sides or
attempting to turn the dangers of one front against the other.

When dealing with multiple adventure fronts the players are likely to
prioritize. The cult needs attention now, the orcs can wait, or vice versa.
These decisions lead to the slow advancement of the neglected front, eventually
causing more problems for the characters and leading to new adventures. This can
get complex once you’ve got three or four fronts in play. Take care not to get
overwhelmed.
* An Example Front: The Opening of the White Gate
** Dangers
*** The College of Arcanists (Cabal)
*Impulse:* to absorb those in power, to grow
**** Grim Portents
    - The College sends an expedition to the Gate
    - The Key is discovered
    - The Gate’s Power is harnessed
    - The College seizes control
*Impending Doom:* Usurpation
*** The White Gate (Dark Portal)
*Impulse:* to disgorge demons
**** Grim Portents
    - The First Trumpet sounds
    - The Second Trumpet sounds
    - The Gate is opened
*Impending Doom:* Destruction
*** The Argent Seraphim (Choir of Angels)
*Impulse:* to pass judgement
**** Grim Portents
    - A Champion is chosen
    - An organization of power is formed or co-opted
    - The Herald appears
    - Judgement is passed
*Impending Doom:* Tyranny
** Description and Cast
An ancient gate, buried for aeons in the icy north. It opens into a realm of
pure light, guarded by the Argent Seraphim. It was crafted only to be opened at
Judgement Day, so that the Seraphim could come forth and purge the realm of men.
It was recently uncovered by the College of Arcanists, who do not yet understand
its terrible power.
    - Oren Balserus, Arcanist Supreme
    - Hali’el, voice of the Seraphim
    - Drudge, a manservant
** Custom Moves
When you *stand in the presence of the Light From Beyond*, roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+
you are judged worthy, the Argent Seraphim will grant you a vision or boon. ✴On
a 7-9 you are under suspicion and see a vision of what dark fate might befall
you if you do not correct your ways. ✴On a miss, thou art weighed in the balance
and art found wanting.
** Stakes
    - Who will be the Champion?
    - How will Lux respond to the holy light?
    - Will the College be able to recruit Avon?
* The world
Much of the adventuring life is spent in dusty, forgotten tombs or in places of
terror and life-threatening danger. It’s commonplace to awaken from a short and
fitful rest still deep in the belly of the world and surrounded by foes. When
the time comes to emerge from these places—whether laden with the spoils of
battle or beaten and bloody—an adventurer seeks out safety and solace.

These are the comforts of civilization: a warm bath, a meal of mead and bread,
the company of fellow men and elves and dwarves and halflings. Often thoughts of
returning to these places are all that keep an adventurer from giving up
altogether. All fight for gold and glory but who doesn’t ache for a place to
spend that gold and laugh around a fire, listening to tales of folly and
adventure?

This chapter covers the wider world—the grand and sweeping scope outside the
dungeon. The always marching movement of the GM’s fronts will shape the world
and, in turn, the world reflects the actions the players take to stop or
redirect them.
*** Steadings
We call all the assorted communities, holds, and so on where there’s a place to
stay and some modicum of civilization *steadings*, as in “homestead.” Steadings
are places with at least a handful of inhabitants, usually humans, and some
stable structures. They can be as big as a capital city or as small as few
ramshackle buildings.
** Creating the world
Remember how you started the first session? With action either underway or
impending? At some point the characters are going to need to retreat from that
action, either to heal their wounds or to celebrate and resupply.

When the players leave the site of their first adventure for the safety of
civilization it’s time to start drawing the campaign map. Take a large sheet of
paper (plain white if you like or hex-gridded if you want to get fancy), place
it where everyone can see, and make a mark for the site of the adventure. Use
pencil: this map will change. It can be to-scale and detailed or broad and
abstract, depending on your preference, just make it obvious. Keep the mark
small and somewhere around the center of the paper so you have space to grow.

Now add the nearest steading, a place the characters can go to rest and gather
supplies. Draw a mark for that place on the map and fill in the space between
with some terrain features. Try to keep it within a day or two of the site of
their first adventure—a short trip through a rocky pass or some heavy woods is
suitable, or a wider distance by road or across open ground.

When you have time (after the first session or during a snack break, for
example) use the rules to create the first steading. Consider adding marks for
other places that have been mentioned so far, either details from character
creation or the steading rules themselves.
** While You’re In Town…
When the players visit a steading there are some special moves they’ll be able
to make. These still follow the fictional flow of the game. When the players
arrive, ask them “What do you do?” The players’ actions will, more often than
not, trigger a move from this list. They cover respite, reinvigoration, and
resupply—opportunities for the players to gather their wits and spend their
treasure. Remember that a steading isn’t a break from reality. You’re still
making hard moves when necessary and thinking about how the players’ actions (or
inaction) advances your fronts. The impending doom is always there, whether the
players are fighting it in the dungeon or ignoring it while getting drunk in the
local tavern.

Don’t let a visit to a steading become a permanent respite. Remember, Dungeon
World is a scary, dangerous place. If the players choose to ignore that, they’re
giving you a golden opportunity to make a hard move. Fill the characters’ lives
with adventure whether they’re out seeking it or not. These moves exist so you
can make a visit to town an interesting event without spending a whole session
haggling over the cost of a new baldric.
** Elements of a Steading
A steading is any bit of civilization that offers some amount of safety to its
inhabitants. Villages, towns, keeps, and cities are the most common steadings.
Steadings are described by their tags. All steadings have tags indicating
prosperity, population, and defenses. Many will have tags to illustrate their
more unusual properties.

Steadings are differentiated based on size. The size indicates roughly how many
people the steading can support. The population tag tells you if the current
population is more than or less than this amount.

Villages are the smallest steadings. They’re usually out of the way, off the
main roads. If they’re lucky they can muster some defense but it’s often just
rabble with pitchforks and torches. A village stands near some easily
exploitable resource: rich soil, plentiful fish, an old forest, or a mine. There
might be a store of some sort but more likely its people trade among themselves.
Coin is scarce.

Towns have a hundred or so inhabitants. They’re the kind of place that springs
up around a mill, trading post, or inn and usually have fields, farms, and
livestock of some kind. They might have a standing militia of farmers strong
enough to wield a blade or shoot a bow. Towns have the basics for sale but
certainly no special goods. Usually they’ll focus on a local product or two and
do some trade with travelers.

A keep is a steading built specifically for defense—sometimes of a particularly
important location like a river delta or a rich gold mine. Keeps are found at
the frontier edges of civilization. Inhabitants are inured to the day-to-day
dangers of the road. They’re tough folks that number between a hundred and a
thousand, depending on the size of the keep and the place it defends. Keeps
won’t often have much beyond their own supplies, traded to them from nearby
villages, but will almost always have arms and armor and sometimes a rare
magical item found in the local wilds.

From bustling trade center to sprawling metropolis, the city represents the
largest sort of steading in Dungeon World. These are places where folk of many
races and kinds can be found. They often exist at the confluence of a handful of
trade routes or are built in a place of spiritual significance. They don’t often
generate their own raw materials for trade, relying on supplies from villages
nearby for food and resources, but will always have crafted goods and some
stranger things for sale to those willing to seek them.

Prosperity indicates what kinds of items are usually available. Population
indicates the number of inhabitants relative to the current size of the
steading. Defenses indicate the general scope of arms the steading has. Tags in
these categories can be adjusted. -Category means to change the steading to the
next lower tag for that category (so Moderate would become Poor with
-Prosperity). +Category means to change the steading to the next higher tag (so
Shrinking becomes Steady with +Population). Tags in those categories can also be
compared like numbers. Treat the lowest tag in that category as 1 and each
successive tag as the next number (so Dirt is 1, Poor is 2, etc.).

Tags will change over the course of play. Creating a steading provides a
snapshot of what that place looks like /right now/. As the players spend time in
it and your fronts progress the world will change and your steadings with it.
*** Adding Steadings
You add your first steading when you create the campaign map—it’s the place the
players go to rest and recover. When you first draw it on the map all you need
is a name and a location.

When you have the time you’ll use the rules below to create the steading. The
first steading is usually a village, but you can use a town if the first
adventure was closely tied to humans (for example, if the players fought a human
cult). Create it using the rules below.

Once you’ve created the first steading you can add other places referenced in
its tags (the oath, trade, and enmity tags in particular) or anywhere else
that’s been referred to in play. Don’t add too much in the first session, leave
blanks and places to explore.

As play progresses the characters will discover new locales and places of
interest either directly, by stumbling upon them in the wild, or indirectly, by
hearing about them in rumors or tales. Add new steadings, dungeons, and other
locations to the map as they’re discovered or heard about. Villages are often
near a useful resource. Towns are often found at the point where several
villages meet to trade. Keeps watch over important locations. Cities rely on the
trade and support of smaller steads. Dungeons can be found anywhere and in many
forms.

Whenever you add a new steading use the rules to decide its tags. Consider
adding a distinctive feature somewhere nearby. Maybe a forest, some old standing
stones, an abandoned castle, or whatever else catches your fancy or makes sense.
A map of only steadings and ruins with nothing in between is dull; don’t neglect
the other features of the world.
*** Steading Tags
**** Prosperity

/Dirt/: Nothing for sale, nobody has more than they need (and they’re lucky if
they have that). Unskilled labor is cheap.

/Poor/: Only the bare necessities for sale. Weapons are scarce unless the
steading is heavily defended or militant. Unskilled labor is readily available.

/Moderate/: Most mundane items are available. Some types of skilled laborers.

/Wealthy/: Any mundane item can be found for sale. Most kinds of skilled
laborers are available, but demand is high for their time.

/Rich/: Mundane items and more, if you know where to find them. Specialist labor
available, but at high prices.
**** Population

/Exodus/: The steading has lost its population and is on the verge of collapse.

/Shrinking/: The population is less than it once was. Buildings stand empty.

/Steady/: The population is in line with the current size of the steading. Some
slow growth.

/Growing/: More people than there are buildings.

/Booming/: Resources are stretched thin trying to keep up with the number of
people.
**** Defenses

/None/: Clubs, torches, farming tools.

/Militia/: There are able-bodied men and women with worn weapons ready to be
called, but no standing force.

/Watch/: There are a few watchers posted who look out for trouble and settle
small problems, but their main role is to summon the militia.

/Guard/: There are armed defenders at all times with a total pool of less than
100 (or equivalent). There is always at least one armed patrol about the
steading.

/Garrison/: There are armed defenders at all times with a total pool of 100–300
(or equivalent). There are multiple armed patrols at all times.

/Battalion/: As many as 1,000 armed defenders (or equivalent). The steading has
manned maintained defenses as well.

/Legion/: The steading is defended by thousands of armed soldiers (or
equivalent). The steading’s defenses are intimidating.
**** Other Tags

/Safe/: Outside trouble doesn’t come here until the players bring it. Idyllic
and often hidden, if the steading would lose or degrade another beneficial tag
get rid of safe instead.

/Religion/: The listed deity is revered here.

/Exotic/: There are goods and services available here that aren’t available
anywhere else nearby. List them.

/Resource/: The steading has easy access to the listed resource (e.g., a spice,
a type of ore, fish, grapes). That resource is significantly cheaper.

/Need/: The steading has an acute or ongoing need for the listed resource. That
resource sells for considerably more.

/Oath/: The steading has sworn oaths to the listed steadings. These oaths are
generally of fealty or support, but may be more specific.

/Trade/: The steading regularly trades with the listed steadings.

/Market/: Everyone comes here to trade. On any given day the available items may
be far beyond their prosperity. +1 to supply.

/Enmity/: The steading holds a grudge against the listed steadings.

/History/: Something important once happened here, choose one and detail or make
up your own: battle, miracle, myth, romance, tragedy.

/Arcane/: Someone in town can cast arcane spells for a price. This tends to draw
more arcane casters, +1 to recruit when you put out word you’re looking for an
adept.

/Divine/: There is a major religious presence, maybe a cathedral or monastery.
They can heal and maybe even raise the dead for a donation or resolution of a
quest. Take +1 to recruit priests here.

/Guild/: The listed type of guild has a major presence (and usually a fair
amount of influence). If the guild is closely associated with a type of
hireling, +1 to recruit that type of hireling.

/Personage/: There’s a notable person who makes their home here. Give them a
name and a short note on why they’re notable.

/Dwarven/: The steading is significantly or entirely dwarves. Dwarven goods are
more common and less expensive than they typically are.

/Elven/: The steading is significantly or entirely elves. Elven goods are more
common and less expensive than they typically are.

/Craft/: The steading is known for excellence in the listed craft. Items of
their chosen craft are more readily available here or of higher quality than
found elsewhere.

/Lawless/: Crime is rampant; authority is weak.

/Blight/: The steading has a recurring problem, usually a type of monster.

/Power/: The steading holds sway of some type. Typically political, divine, or
arcane.
*** Steading Names
Graybark, Nook’s Crossing, Tanner’s Ford, Goldenfield, Barrowbridge, Rum River,
Brindenburg, Shambles, Covaner, Enfield, Crystal Falls, Castle Daunting, Nulty’s
Harbor, Castonshire, Cornwood, Irongate, Mayhill, Pigton, Crosses, Battlemoore,
Torsea, Curland, Snowcalm, Seawall, Varlosh, Terminum, Avonia, Bucksburg,
Settledown, Goblinjaw, Hammerford, Pit, The Gray Fast, Ennet Bend, Harrison’s
Hold, Fortress Andwynne, Blackstone
** Making a Village
By default a village is Poor, Steady, Militia, Resource (your choice) and has an
Oath to another steading of your choice. If the village is part of a kingdom or
empire choose one:
    - The village is somewhere naturally defended: Safe, -Defenses
    - The village has abundant resources that sustain it: +Prosperity, Resource
      (your choice), Enmity (your choice)
    - The village is under the protection of another steading: Oath (that
      steading), +Defenses
    - The village is on a major road: Trade (your choice), +Prosperity
    - The village is built around a wizard’s tower: Personage (the wizard),
      Blight (arcane creatures)
    - The village was built on the site of religious significance: Divine,
      History (your choice)
Choose one problem:
    - The village is in arid or uncultivable land: Need (Food)
    - The village is dedicated to a deity: Religious (that deity), Enmity (a
      settlement of another deity)
    - The village has recently fought a battle: -Population, -Prosperity if they
      fought to the end, -Defenses if they lost.
    - The village has a monster problem: Blight (that monster), Need
      (adventurers)
    - The village has absorbed another village: +Population, Lawless
    - The village is remote or unwelcoming: -Prosperity, Dwarven or Elven
** Making a Town
By default a town is Moderate, Steady, Watch, and Trade (two of your choice). If
the town is listed as Trade by another steading choose one:
    - The town is booming: Booming, Lawless
    - The town stands on a crossroads: Market, +Prosperity
    - The town is defended by another steading: Oath (that steading), +Defenses
    - The town is built around a church: Power (Divine)
    - The town is built around a craft: Craft (your choice), Resource (something
      required for that craft)
    - The town is built around a military post: +Defenses
Choose one problem:
    - The town has grown too big for an important supply (like grain, wood, or
      stone): Need (that resource), Trade (a village or town with that resource)
    - The town offers defense to others: Oath (your choice), -Defenses
    - The town is notorious for an outlaw who is rumored to live there:
      Personage (the outlaw), Enmity (where the crimes were committed)
    - The town has cornered the market on a good or service: Exotic (that good
      or service), Enmity (a settlement with ambition)
    - The town has a disease: -Population
    - The town is a popular meeting place: +Population, Lawless
** Making a Keep
By default a keep is Poor, Shrinking, Guard, Need (Supplies), Trade (someplace
with supplies), Oath (your choice). If the keep is owed fealty by at least one
settlement choose one:
    - The keep belongs to a noble family: +Prosperity, Power (Political)
    - The keep is run by a skilled commander: Personage (the commander),
      +Defenses
    - The keep stands watch over a trade road: +Prosperity, Guild (trade)
    - The keep is used to train special troops: Arcane, -Population
    - The keep is surrounded by fertile land: remove Need (Supplies)
    - The keep stands on a border: +Defenses, Enmity (steading on the other side
      of the border)
Choose one problem
    - The keep is built on a naturally defensible position: Safe, -Population
    - The keep was a conquest from another power: Enmity (steadings of that
      power)
    - The keep is a safe haven for brigands: Lawless
    - The keep was built to defend from a specific threat: Blight (that threat)
    - The keep has seen horrible bloody war: History (Battle), Blight (Restless
      Spirits)
    - The keep is given the worst of the worst: Need (Skilled Recruits)
** Making a City
By default a city is Moderate, Steady, Guard, Market, and Guild (one of your
choice). It also has Oaths with at least two other steadings, usually a town and
a keep. If the city has trade with at least one steading and fealty from at
least one steading choose one:
    - The city has permanent defenses, like walls: +Defenses, Oath (your choice)
    - The city is ruled by a single individual: Personage (the ruler), Power
      (Political)
    - The city is diverse: Dwarven or Elven or both
    - The city is a trade hub: Trade (every steading nearby), +Prosperity
    - The city is ancient, built on top of its own ruins: History (your choice),
      Divine
    - The city is a center of learning: Arcane, Craft (your choice), Power
      (Arcane)
Choose one problem:
    - The city has outgrown its resources: +Population, Need (food)
    - The city has designs on nearby territory: Enmity (nearby steadings),
      +Defenses
    - The city is ruled by a theocracy: -Defenses, Power (Divine)
    - The city is ruled by the people: -Defenses, +Population
    - The city has supernatural defenses: +Defenses, Blight (related
      supernatural creatures)
    - The city lies on a place of power: Arcane, Personage (whoever watches the
      place of power), Blight (arcane creatures)
** Fronts on the Campaign Map
Your steadings are not the only thing on the campaign map. In addition to
steadings and the areas around them your fronts will appear on the map, albeit
indirectly.

Fronts are organizational tools, not something the characters think of, so don’t
put them on the map directly. The orcs of Olg’gothal may be a front but don’t
just draw them on the map. Instead for each front add some feature to the map
that indicates the front’s presence. You can label it if you like, but use the
name that the characters would use, not the name you gave the front.

For example, the orcs of Olg’gothal could be marked on the map with a burning
village they left behind, fires in the distance at night, or a stream of
refugees. Lord Xothal, a lich, might be marked by the tower where dead plants
take root and grow.

As your fronts change, change the map. If the players cleanse Xothal’s tower
redraw it. If the orcs are driven off erase the crowds of refugees.
** Updating the Campaign Map
The campaign map is updated between sessions or whenever the players spend
significant downtime in a safe place. Updates are both prescriptive and
descriptive: if an event transpires that, say, gathers a larger fighting force
to a village, update the tags to reflect that. Likewise if a change in tags mean
that a village has a bigger fighting force you’ll likely see more armored men in
the street.

Between each session check each of the conditions below. Go down the list and
check each condition for all steadings before moving to the next. If a condition
applies, apply its effects.
**** Growth
When *a village or town is booming and its prosperity is above moderate* you may
reduce prosperity and defenses to move to the next largest type. New towns
immediately gain market and new cities immediately gain guild (your choice).
**** Collapse
When *a steading’s population is in exodus and its prosperity is poor or less*
it shrinks. A city becomes a town with a steady population and +prosperity. A
keep becomes a town with +defenses and a steady population. A town becomes a
village with steady population and +prosperity. A village becomes a ghost town.
**** Want
When *a steading has a need that is not fulfilled* (through trade, capture, or
otherwise) that steading is in want. It gets either -prosperity, -population, or
loses a tag based on that resource like craft or trade, your choice.
**** Trade
When *trade is blocked* because the source of that trade is gone, the route is
endangered, or political reasons, the steading has a choice: gain need (a traded
good) or take -prosperity.
**** Capture
When *control of a resource changes* remove that resource from the tags of the
previous owner and add it to the tags of the new owner (if applicable). If the
previous owner has a craft or trade based on that resource they now have need
(that resource). If the new owner had a need for that resource, remove it.
**** Profit
When *a steading has more trade than its current prosperity* it gets
+prosperity.
**** Surplus
When *a steading has a resource that another steading needs* unless enmity or
other diplomatic reasons prevent it they set up trade. The steading with the
resource gets +prosperity and their choice of oaths, +population, or +defenses;
the steading with the need erases that need and adds trade.
**** Aid
When *a steading has oaths to a steading under attack* that steading may take
-defenses to give the steading under attack +defenses.
**** Embattled
When *a steading is surrounded by enemy forces* it suffers losses. If it fights
back with force it gets -defenses. If its new defenses are watch or less it also
gets -prosperity. If it instead tries to wait out the attack it gets
-population. If its new population is shrinking or less it loses a tag of your
choice. If the steading’s defenses outclass the attacker’s (your call if it’s
not clear, or make it part of an adventure front) the steading is no longer
surrounded.
**** Opportunity
When *a steading has enmity against a weaker steading* they may attack. Subtract
the distance (in rations) between the steadings from the steading with enmity’s
defenses. If the result is greater than the other steading’s defenses +defense
for each step of size difference (village to town, town to keep, keep to city)
they definitely attack. Otherwise it’s your call: has anything happened recently
to stoke their anger? The forces of the attacker embattle the defender, while
they maintain the attack they’re -defenses.
**** Clash
When *two steadings both attack each other* their forces meet somewhere between
them and fight. If they’re evenly matched they both get -defenses and their
troops return home. If one has the advantage they take -defenses while the other
takes -2 defenses.
*** Other Updates
The conditions above detail the most basic of interactions between steadings, of
course the presence of your fronts and the players mean things can get far more
complex. Since tags are descriptive, add them as needed to reflect the players’
actions and your fronts’ effects on the world.

* Monsters
Great heroes need horrendous antagonists. This section is about how to create
and play as those antagonists—from the lowly goblin warrior to the hellish
demon.
** Using Monsters
A monster is any living (or undead) thing that stands in the characters’ way.

How you use these monsters follows directly from your agenda and principles.
Stay true to your principles, use your moves and pursue your agenda—you can’t go
wrong.

Your first agenda is to /portray a fantastic world/. The way you describe the
monsters and adversaries the characters face can be a tool to help you fulfill
that agenda. Describing those creatures and people in vivid detail will bring
them to life. You’ll eventually need some stats for those monsters, too—the
rules in this chapter are here to help you create those stats quickly and
easily.

The player characters are the heroes. Monsters exist to illustrate what a
dangerous awful place Dungeon World can be—how it will remain if the heroes
don’t step in. You shouldn’t be rooting for the monsters to win, but they may
challenge, and even sometimes defeat, the heroes. If you feel like your monsters
are being beaten too quickly, don’t worry. Let the players revel in their
victory, there’s always more monsters.

The principle of /think dangerous/ sums up that philosophy—think of every
monster like an arrow fired at the characters. The monsters are ammunition of
the danger you’re presenting. Some may be smarter, faster, or more dangerous
than others but until a monster warrants a name, a personality, or some other
special consideration, it’s an arrow. Take aim and shoot. Don’t worry if you
miss.

A monster stops being mere ammunition when something in the world puts the
spotlight on it. This might be a spout lore roll that leads your description in
an interesting direction or the result of your asking questions and building on
the players’ answers. Maybe the characters were overwhelmed in battle and had to
run away, giving them a new-found fear and respect for the beast they fought.
When these things happen, feel free to give the monster a name and consider
creating a danger to represent it.

One thing that your agenda and principles don’t say anything about is setting up
a fair fight. Heroes are often outnumbered or faced with ridiculous
odds—sometimes they have to retreat and make a new plan. Sometimes they suffer
loss. When adding a monster to a front, placing them in a dungeon, or making
them up on the fly your first responsibility is to the fiction (/portray a
fantastic world/) and to give the characters a real threat (/make the characters
heroes/), not to make a balanced fight. Dungeon World isn’t about balancing
encounter levels or counting experience points; it’s about adventure and
death-defying feats!
** Elements of a Monster
Every monster has *moves* that describe its behavior and abilities. Just like
the normal GM moves, they’re things that you do when there’s a lull in the
action or when the players give you a golden opportunity. As with other GM moves
they can be hard or soft depending on the circumstances and the move: a move
that’s irreversible and immediate is hard, a move that’s impending or easy to
counter is soft.

Each monster has an *instinct* that describe its goals at a high level. Some
monsters live for conquest, or treasure, or simply for blood. The monster’s
instinct is the guide to how to use it in the fiction.

The monster’s *description* is where all its other features come from. The
description is how you know what the monster really is, the other elements just
reflect the description.

*Damage* is a measure of how much pain the monster can inflict at once. Just
 like player damage it’s a die to roll, maybe with some modifiers. A monster
 deals its damage to another monster or a player whenever it causes them
 physical harm.

Each monster has *tags* that describe how it deals damage, including the
range(s) of its attacks. When trying to attack something out of its range (too
close or too far) the monster’s out of luck, no damage. Any tag that can go on a
weapon (like messy or slow) can also go on a monster.

There are special tags that apply only to monsters. These tags, listed below,
describe the key attributes of the monster—qualities that describe how big they
are and how, if at all, they organize themselves.

A monster’s *HP* is a measure of how much damage it can take before it dies.
Just like players, when a monster takes damage it subtracts that amount from its
HP. At 0 HP it’s dead, no last breath.

Some monsters are lucky enough to enjoy *armor*. It’s just like player armor:
when a monster with armor takes damage it subtracts its armor from the damage
done.

*Special qualities* describe innate aspects of the monster that are important to
 play. These are a guide to the fiction, and therefore the moves. A quality like
 intangible means just what it says: mundane stuff just passes through it. That
 means swinging a mundane sword at it isn’t hack and slash, for a start.
*** Monsters Without Stats
Some creatures operate on a scale so far beyond the mortal that concepts like
HP, armor, and damage just do not hold. Some creatures just aren’t dangerous in
a fight. These creatures may still cause problems for the players and may even
be defeated with clever thinking and enough preparation.

If a creature is of such a scale far beyond the players, or if it just doesn’t
put up a physical fight, don’t assign it HP, damage, or armor. You can still use
the monster creation rules to give it tags. The core of a stat-less monster is
its instinct and moves; you can have it make its moves and act according to its
instinct even without numeric stats.
** Monster Tags
/Magical/: It is by nature magical through and through.
/Devious/: Its main danger lies beyond the simple clash of battle.
/Amorphous/: Its anatomy and organs are bizarre and unnatural.
/Organized/: It has a group structure that aids it in survival. Defeating one
may cause the wrath of others. One may sound an alarm.
/Intelligent/: It’s smart enough that some individuals pick up other skills. The
GM can adapt the monster by adding tags to reflect specific training, like a
mage or warrior.
/Hoarder/: It almost certainly has treasure.
/Stealthy/: It can avoid detection and prefers to attack with the element of
surprise.
/Terrifying/: Its presence and appearance evoke fear.
/Cautious/: It prizes survival over aggression.
/Construct/: It was made, not born
/Planar/: It’s from beyond this world
*** Organization Tags
/Horde/: Where there’s one, there’s more. A lot more.
/Group/: Usually seen in small numbers, 3–6 or so.
/Solitary/: It lives and fights alone.
*** Size Tags
/Tiny/: It’s much smaller than a halfling.
/Small/: It’s about halfling size.
/Large/: It’s much bigger than a human, about as big as a cart.
/Huge/: It’s as big as a small house or larger.
** Making Monsters
Monsters start with your description of them. Whether you’re making the monster
before play or just as the players come face-to-face with it, every monster
starts with a clear vision of what it is and what it does.

If you’re making a monster between sessions start by imagining it. Imagine what
it looks like, what it does, why it stands out. Imagine the stories told about
it and what effects it has had on the world.

If you’re making a monster on the fly during a session start by describing it to
the players. Your description starts before the characters even lay eyes on it:
describe where it lives, what marks it has made on the environment around it.
Your description is the key to the monster.

When you find you need stats for the monster you use this series of questions to
establish them. Answer every question based on the facts established and
imagined. Don’t answer them aloud to anyone else, just note down the answers and
the stats listed with each answer.

If two questions would grant the same tag don’t worry about it. If you like you
can adjust damage or HP by 2 to reflect the tag that would be repeated, but it’s
not necessary. If a combination of answers would reduce HP or damage below 1
they stay at 1.

When you’re finished your monster may have only one move. If this is the case
and you plan on using the monster often, give it another 1–2 moves of your
choice. These moves often describe secondary modes of attack, other uses for a
primary mode of attack, or connections to a certain place in the world.
**** What is it known to do?
Write a monster move describing what it does.
**** What does it want that causes problems for others?
This is its instinct. Write it as an intended action.
**** How does it usually hunt or fight?
    - In large groups: horde, d6 damage, 3 HP
    - In small groups, about 2–5: group, d8 damage, 6 HP
    - All by its lonesome: solitary, d10 damage, 12 HP
**** How big is it?
    - Smaller than a house cat: tiny, hand, -2 damage
    - Halfling-esque: small, close
    - About human size: close
    - As big as a cart: large, close, reach, +4 HP, +1 damage
    - Much larger than a cart: huge, reach, +8 HP, +3 damage
**** What is its most important defense?
    - Cloth or flesh: 0 armor
    - Leathers or thick hide: 1 armor
    - Mail or scales: 2 armor
    - Plate or bone: 3 armor
    - Permanent magical protection: 4 armor, magical
**** What is it known for? (Choose all that apply)
    - Unrelenting strength: +2 damage, forceful
    - Skill in offense: roll damage twice and take the better roll
    - Skill in defense: +1 armor
    - Deft strikes: +1 piercing
    - Uncanny endurance: +4 HP
    - Deceit and trickery: stealthy, write a move about dirty tricks
    - A useful adaptation like being amphibious or having wings: Add a special
      quality for the adaptation
    - The favor of the gods: divine, +2 damage or +2 HP or both (your call)
    - Spells and magic: magical, write a move about its spells
**** What is its most common form of attack?
Note it along with the creature’s damage. Common answers include: a type of
weapon, claws, a specific spell. Then answer these questions about it:
    - Its armaments are vicious and obvious: +2 damage
    - It lets the monster keep others at bay: reach
    - Its armaments are small and weak: reduce its damage die size by one
    - Its armaments can slice or pierce metal: messy, +1 piercing or +3 piercing
      if it can just tear metal apart
    - Armor doesn’t help with the damage it deals (due to magic, size, etc.):
      ignores armor
    - It usually attacks at range (with arrows, spells, or other projectiles):
      near or far or both (your call)
**** Which of these describe it? (Choose all that apply)
    - It isn’t dangerous because of the wounds it inflicts, but for other
      reasons: devious, reduce its damage die size by one, write a move about
      why it’s dangerous
    - It organizes into larger groups that it can call on for support:
      organized, write a move about calling on others for help
    - It’s as smart as a human or thereabouts: intelligent
    - It actively defends itself with a shield or similar: cautious, +1 Armor
    - It collects trinkets that humans would consider valuable (gold, gems,
      secrets): hoarder
    - It’s from beyond this world: planar, write a move about using its
      otherworldly knowledge and power
    - It’s kept alive by something beyond simple biology: +4 HP
    - It was made by someone: construct, give it a special quality or two about
      its construction or purpose
    - Its appearance is disturbing, terrible, or horrible: terrifying, write a
      special quality about why it’s so horrendous
    - It doesn’t have organs or discernible anatomy: amorphous, +1 Armor, +3 HP
    - It (or its species) is ancient—older than man, elves, and dwarves:
      increase its damage die size by one
    - It abhors violence: roll damage twice and take the worst result
** Treasure
Monsters, much like adventurers, collect shiny useful things. When the players
search the belongings of a monster (be they on their person or tucked away
somewhere) describe them honestly.
If the monster has accumulated some wealth you can roll that randomly. Start
with the monster’s damage die, modified if the monster is:
    - Hoarder: roll damage die twice, take higher result
    - Far from home: add at least one ration (usable by anyone with similar
      taste)
    - Magical: some strange item, possibly magical
    - Divine: a sign of a deity (or deities)
    - Planar: something not of this earth
    - Lord over others: +1d4 to the roll
    - Ancient and noteworthy: +1d4 to the roll
Roll the monster’s damage die plus any added dice to find the monster’s
treasure:
    1. A few coins, 2d8 or so
    2. An item useful to the current situation
    3. Several coins, about 4d10
    4. A small item (gem, art) of considerable value, worth as much as 2d10×10
    coins, 0 weight
    1. Some minor magical trinket
    2. Useful information (in the form of clues, notes, etc.)
    3. A bag of coins, 1d4×100 or thereabouts. 1 weight per 100.
    4. A very valuable small item (gem, art) worth 2d6×100, 0 weight
    5. A chest of coins and other small valuables. 1 weight but worth 3d6×100
    coins.
    1. A magical item or magical effect
    2. Many bags of coins for a total of 2d4×100 or so
    3. A sign of office (crown, banner) worth at least 3d4×100 coins
    4. A large art item worth 4d4×100 coins, 1 weight
    5. A unique item worth at least 5d4×100 coins
    6. All the information needed to learn a new spell and roll again
    7. A portal or secret path (or directions to one) and roll again
    8. Something relating to one of the characters and roll again
    9. A hoard: 1d10×1000 coins and 1d10×10 gems worth 2d6×100 each
** Monster Settings
The monsters in this book are presented in /monster settings/. A monster setting
is a type of location and the monsters you might find there. It’s a way of
grouping monsters by where they fit in the world. A monster setting tells you
what kind of monsters might inhabit an area while your fronts tell you what
monsters are working together or have ongoing plots.

When creating your own monster settings, they can be more specific. You could
create a monster setting for the Great Western Steppes or the Domains of the
Horse Lords.

Consult a monster setting to populate a front or when you want a threat that is
only tangentially related to one of your fronts. For example, if the heroes are
battling against the dungeon front, the cult of Khul-ka-ra, by exploring the
ancient ruins that the cult has made its home then you might use monsters from
the Legions of the Undead as a related threat—not truly part of the front but
still a block in the heroes’ path.

The monster stat blocks within the settings describe HP, damage, and all the
other aspects of the monster. These monsters were created with the same process
listed above, and the reasons for their stats are just as important as the stats
themselves. Looking at the reasoning behind the stats will allow you to present
the monsters honestly, answering questions that arise in Dungeon World like “can
a warband of gnolls sack an entire village?”
*** Cavern Dwellers
At the edges of civilization in the caves and tunnels below the old mountains of
the world dwell all sorts of scheming, dangerous monsters. Some are wily and
old, like the race of goblins scheming to burn villages and make off with
livestock. Others are strange aberrations of nature like the stinking,
trash-eating Otyugh. A word of caution, then, to those brave adventurers whose
first foray into danger leads them into these dank and shadowy places; bad
things live in the dark. Bad things with sharp teeth.
*** Denizens of the Swamp
All things give way to rot in the end. Food spoils on the table, men’s minds go
mad with age and disease. Even the world itself, when left untended and uncared
for, can turn to black muck and stinking air. Things dwell in these parts of
Dungeon World. Things gone just as a bad as the swirling filth that fills the
swamps. In these cesspit lowlands, adventurers will find such creatures as the
deadly-eyed basilisk or the famed, unkillable troll. You’ll need more than a dry
pair of boots to survive these putrid fens. A sword would be a good start.
*** Legions of the Undead
The sermons of mannish and dwarven gods would tell you that Death is the end of
all. They say that once the mortal coil is unwound and a person takes their
final breath that all is warmth and song and the white wings of angels. Not so.
Not for all. For some, after life’s embrace loses its strength a darker power
can take hold. Black magic rips the dead from the ground and gives them
shambling unlife full of hate and hunger. Sorcery and witchcraft lend an ancient
spell-smith the power to live forever in the husk of a Lich. There are bleak
enchantments at play in shadowy corners all throughout Dungeon World. These
creatures are the spawn of that fell magic.
*** The Dark Woods
It would not be a lie to say that there are trees that stand in the deepest
groves of Dungeon World that have stood since before man or elf walked amidst
their roots. It would be true, too, to say that these ancient trees have long
lost the green leaves of spring. In the strands of the dark woods one finds, if
one looks in the right place, sylvan monsters old and powerful. Here live the
race of savage centaurs and the fey soul-stealing creatures of yore. Under the
shadow of the ancient trees, wolf-men howl for blood. Hurry along the old forest
road and light no fire for food or warmth for it’s said that flames offend the
woods themselves. You wouldn’t want that, would you?
*** Ravenous Hordes
“I’ve bested an orc in single combat,” they crow. “I’ve fought a gnoll and lived
to the tell the tale.” Which is no small feat and yet, you know the truth of
these boasts. Like vermin, spotting but one of these creatures speaks to a
greater doom on the horizon. No orc travels alone. No slavering gnoll moves
without his pack. You know that soon, the wardrums will sound and the walls will
be besieged by the full fury of the warchief and his tusked berserkers. These
are the monsters that will bring civilization, screaming and weeping, to its
knees. Unless you can stop them. Best of luck.
*** Twisted Experiments
For some who learn the arcane arts it’s not merely enough to be able to live for
a thousand years or throw lightning bolts that can fry a man. Some aren’t quite
satisfied with the power to speak to the dead or draw the angels down from
heaven. Hubris calls on those cloaked-and-hooded “scientists” to make a strange
and unholy life of their own. No mortal children, these. These are the brood of
a mind gone foul with strange magic. In this setting you will find such
nightmares as the chimera, dripping poison. Here, too, are the protector golems
and mutant apes. All sorts of bad ideas await you in the fallen towers of the
mad magicians of Dungeon World.
*** The Lower Depths
Ruins dot the countryside of Dungeon World. Old bastions of long-forgotten
civilization fallen to decay, to monsters, or to the whim of a vengeful god.
These ruins often cover a much more dangerous truth—catacombs and underground
complexes lousy with traps and monsters. Gold, too. Which is why you’re here.
Why you’re locked in mortal combat with a tribe of spiteful dark elves. Battling
stone giants in caverns the size of whole countries. Maybe, though, you’re the
noble souls who’ve travelled to the world’s heart to put an end to the
Apocalypse Dragon—the beast who, it is said, will one day swallow the sun and
kill us all. We appreciate it, really. We’ll all pray for you.
*** Planar Powers
Sometimes, monsters do not come from Dungeon World at all. Beyond the mountains
at the edge of the world or below the deepest seas, the sages and wise old
priests say that there are gateways to the lands beyond. They speak of elysian
fields; rivers of sweet wine and maidens dancing in fields of gold. They tell
tales of the paradise of heavens to be found past the Planar Door. Tales tell,
too, of the Thousandfold Hell. Of the swirling Elemental Vortex and the devils
that wait for the stars to align so they can enter Dungeon World and wreak their
bloody havoc. You must be curious to know if these tales are true? What will you
see when the passage to the beyond is opened?
* Cavern Dwellers
** Ankheg Group, Large
*Bite (d8+1 damage) 10 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
A hide like plate armor and great crushing mandibles are problematic. A stomach
full of acid that can burn a hole through a stone wall makes them all the worse.
They’d be bad enough if they were proper insect-sized, but these things have the
gall to be as long as any given horse. It’s just not natural! Good thing they
tend to stick to one place? Easy for you to say—you don’t have an ankheg living
under your corn field. /Instinct/: To undermine
    - Undermine the ground
    - Burst from the earth
    - Spray forth acid, eating away at metal and flesh
** Cave Rat Horde, Small
*Gnaw (d6 damage 1 piercing) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Messy*
Who hasn’t seen a rat before? It’s like that, but nasty and big and not afraid
of you anymore. Maybe this one was a cousin to that one you caught in a trap or
the one you killed with a knife in that filthy tavern in Darrow. Maybe he’s
looking for a little ratty revenge. /Instinct/: To devour
    - Swarm
    - Rip something (or someone) apart
** Choker Solitary, Stealthy, Intelligent
*Choke (d10 damage) 15 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Flexible
Some say these things descended from the family of a cruel wizard who forced
them to live out their lives underground. They say his experiments led him to
fear the sun and ages passed while he descended into unlife, dragging his folk
along with him. These things resemble men, in a way. Head, four limbs and all
that. Only their skin is wet and rubbery and their arms long and fingers
grasping. They hate all life that bears the stink of the sun’s touch, as one
might expect. Jealousy, long-instilled, is hard to shake. /Instinct/: To deny
light
    - Hold someone, wringing the breath from them
    - Fling a held creature
** Cloaker Solitary, Stealthy
*Constrict (d10 damage ignores armor) 12 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Looks like a cloak
Don’t put on that cloak, Gareth. Don’t. You don’t know where it’s been. I tell
you, it’s no good. See! It moved! I’m not mad, Gareth, it moved! Don’t do it!
No! GARETH! /Instinct/: To engulf
    - Engulf the unsuspecting
** Dwarven Warrior Horde, Organized
*Axe (d6 damage) 7 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
For ages, men believed all dwarves were male and all were of this ilk: stoic and
proud warriors. Axe-wielding and plate-wearing. Stout bearded battle-hungry
dwarves who would push them, time and time again, back up out of their mines and
tunnels with ferocity. It just goes to show how little men know about the elder
races. These folk are merely a vanguard, and they bravely do their duty to
protect the riches of the Dwarven realm. Earn their trust and you’ve an ally for
life. Earn their ire and you’re not likely to regret it very long. /Instinct/:
To defend
    - Drive them back
    - Call up reinforcements
** Earth Elemental Solitary, Huge
*Smash (d10+5 damage) 27 HP 4 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Made of stone
Our shaman says that all the things of the world have a spirit. Stones, trees, a
stream. Now that I’ve seen the earth roil under my feet and fists of stone beat
my friends half to death I’d like to believe that crazy old man. The one I saw
was huge—big as a house! It came boiling up from a rockslide out of nowhere and
had a voice like an avalanche. I pay my respects, now. Rightly so. /Instinct/:
To show the strength of earth
    - Turn the ground into a weapon
    - Meld into stone
** Fire Beetle Horde, Small
*Flames (d6 damage ignores armor) 3 HP 3 Armor*
*Near*
*Special Qualities:* Full of flames
/Scarabaeus pyractomena/! What a delightful creature—see how its carapace
glitters in the light of our torches? Not too close now, they’re temperamental,
you see. The fire in their belly isn’t just metaphorical, no. Watch as I goad
the beast. Aha! A spout of flame! Unexpected, isn’t it? One of these creatures
alone, if it comes up from below, can be a hellish nuisance to a farmstead or
village. A whole swarm? There’s a reason they call it a conflagration of fire
beetles. /Instinct/: To enflame
    - Undermine the ground
    - Burst from the earth
    - Spray forth flames
** Gargoyle Horde, Stealthy, Hoarder
*Claw (d6 damage) 3 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
It’s a sad thing, really. Guardians bred by magi of the past with no more
castles to guard. Their ancestors’ sacred task bred into their blood leads them
to find a place—ruins mostly, but sometimes a cave or hill or mountain cliff—and
guard it as though their masters yet lived below. They’re notoriously good at
finding valuables buried below the earth, though. Find one of these winged
reptiles and you’ll find yourself a treasure nearby. Just be careful, they’re
hard to spot and tend to move in packs. /Instinct/: To guard
    - Attack with the element of surprise
    - Take to the air
    - Blend into stonework
** Gelatinous Cube Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Amorphous
*Engulf (d10+1 damage ignores armor) 20 HP 1 Armor*
*Hand*
*Special Qualities:* Transparent
How many adventurers’ last thoughts were “strange, this tunnel seems cleaner
than most?” Too many, and all because of this transparent menace. A great acidic
blob that expands to fill a small chamber or corridor and then slides, ever so
slowly along, eating everything in its path. It cannot eat stone or metal and
will often have them floating in its jelly mass. Blech. /Instinct/: To clean
    - Fill an apparently empty space
    - Dissolve
** Goblin Horde, Small, Intelligent, Organized
*Spear (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
Nobody seems to know where these things came from. Elves say they’re the
dwarves’ fault—dredged up from a hidden place beneath the earth. Dwarves say
they’re bad elvish children, taken away at birth and raised in the dark. The
truth of the matter is that goblins have always been here and they’ll be here
once all the civilized races have fallen and gone away. Goblins never die out.
There’s just too damn many of them. /Instinct/: To multiply
    - Charge!
    - Call more goblins
    - Retreat and return with (many) more
** Goblin Orkaster Solitary, Small, Magical, Intelligent, Organized
*Acid orb (d10+1 damage ignores armor) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Near, Far*
Oh lord, who taught them magic? /Instinct/: To tap power beyond their stature
    - Unleash a poorly understood spell
    - Pour forth magical chaos
    - Use other goblins for shields
** Goliath Group, Huge, Organized, Intelligent
*Mace (d8+7 damage) 14 HP 1 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
They dwell beneath the earth because they do not belong above it any longer. An
undying race of mighty titans fled the plains and mountains in ages past—driven
out by men and their heroes. Left to bide their time in the dark, hate and anger
warmed by the pools of lava deep below. It’s said that an earthquake is a
goliath’s birthing cry. Someday they’ll take back what’s theirs. /Instinct/: To
retake
    - Shake the earth
    - Retreat, only to come back stronger
** Otyugh Solitary, Large
*Tentacles (d10+3 damage) 20 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Filth Fever
The mating call of the otyugh is a horrible, blaring cry that sounds like a
cross between an elephant dying and an over-eager vulture. The otyugh spends
much of its time partly submerged in filthy water and prefers eating garbage
over any other food. As a result, it often grows fat and strong on the offal of
orcs, goblins and other cave-dwelling sub-humans. Get too close, however, and
you’ll have one of its barbed tentacles dragging you into that soggy,
razor-toothed maw. If you get away with your life, best get to a doctor, or your
victory may be short lived. /Instinct/: To befoul
    - Infect someone with filth fever
    - Fling someone or something
** Maggot-Squid Horde, Small
*Chew (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious, Paralyzing Tentacles
The gods that made this thing were playing some sick joke on the civilized folk
of the world. The maggot-squid wields a face full of horrible squirming
tentacles that, if they touch you, feel like being struck by lightning. They’ll
paralyze you and chew you up slowly while you’re helpless. Best to not let it
get to that. /Instinct/: To eat
    - Paralyze with a touch
** Purple Worm Solitary, Huge
*Bite (d10+5 damage) 20 HP 2 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
Iä! Iä! The Purple Worm! Blessed is its holy slime! We walk, unworthy, in its
miles of massive tunnels. We are but shadows under its violet and all-consuming
glory. Mere acolytes, we who hope someday to return to the great embrace of its
tooth-ringed maw. Let it consume us! Let it eat our homes and villages so that
we might be taken! Iä! Iä! The Purple Worm! /Instinct/: To consume
    - Swallow whole
    - Tunnel through stone and earth
** Roper Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Intelligent
*Bite (d10+1 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Rock-like Flesh
Evolutionary happenstance has created a clever underground predator. Disguised
as a rocky formation—most often a stalactite or stalagmite—the roper waits for
its prey to wander by. When it does, whether it’s a rat, a goblin or a foolhardy
adventurer, a mass of thin, whipping tentacles erupts from the thing’s hide. A
hundred lashes in the blink of an eye and the stunned prey is being dragged into
the roper’s mouth. Surprisingly effective for a thing that looks like a rock.
/Instinct/: To ambush
    - Ensnare the unsuspecting
    - Disarm a foe
    - Chew on someone
** Rot Grub Horde, Tiny
*Burrow (d6-2 damage) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Hand*
*Special Qualities:* Burrow into flesh
They live in your skin. Or your organ meat. Or your eyeballs. They grow there
and then, in a bloody and horrific display, burrow their way out. Disgusting.
/Instinct/: To infect
    - Burrow under flesh
    - Lay eggs
    - Burst forth from an infected creature
** Spiderlord Solitary, Large, Devious, Intelligent
*Mandibles (d8+4 damage) 16 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
Even spiders have their gods, whispered to in webs with little praying arms.
/Instinct/: To weave webs (literal and metaphorical)
    - Enmesh in webbing
    - Put a plot into motion
** Troglodyte Group, Organized
*Club (d8 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
Long-forgotten, our last remaining ancestors dwell in caves in the wild parts of
the world. Driven away by our cities and villages, our iron swords and our fire,
these ape-men eat their meat raw with sharp-nailed hands and jagged teeth. They
strike out at frontier villages wielding clubs and in overwhelming numbers to
seize cattle, tools, and poor prisoners to drag into the hills. Known for their
viciousness and their stink, they’re an old and dying race we’d all sooner
forget existed. /Instinct/: To prey on civilization
    - Raid and retreat
    - Use scavenged weapons or magic
* Swamp Denizens
** Bakunawa Solitary, Large, Intelligent, Messy, Forceful
*Bite (d10+3 damage, 1 piercing) 16 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious
Dragon-Turtle’s sister is a mighty serpent queen. Ten yards of scales and
muscle, they say she wakes with a hunger when the sun disappears from the sky.
She is attracted by bright light in the darkness and like any snake, the
Bakunawa is sneaky. She will seek first to beguile and mislead and will only
strike out with violence when no other option is available. When she does,
though, her jaws are strong enough to crack the hull of any swamp-boat and
certainly enough to slice through a steel breastplate or two. Give the greedy
snake your treasures and she might just leave you alone. /Instinct/: To devour
    - Lure prey with lies and illusions
    - Lash out at light
    - Devour
** Basilisk Solitary, Hoarder
*Bite (d10 damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
“Few have seen a basilisk and lived to tell the tale. Get it? Seen a basilisk?
Little bit of basilisk humor there. Sorry, I know you’re looking for something
helpful, sirs. Serious stuff, I understand. The basilisk, even without its
ability to turn your flesh to stone with a gaze, is a dangerous creature. A bit
like a frog, bulbous eyes and six muscled legs built for leaping. A bit like an
alligator, with snapping jaws and sawing teeth. Covered in stony scales and very
hard to kill. Best avoided, if possible.” /Instinct/: To create new statuary
    - Turn flesh to stone with a gaze
    - Retreat into a maze of stone
** Black Pudding Solitary, Amorphous
*Corrosive touch (d10 damage, ignores armor) 15 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Amorphous
How do you kill a pile of goo? A great, squishy pile of goo that also happens to
want to dissolve you and slurp you up? That is a good question to which I have
no answer. Do let us know when you find out. /Instinct/: To dissolve
    - Eat away metal, flesh, or wood
    - Ooze into a troubling place: food, armor, stomach
** Coutal Solitary, Intelligent Devious
*Light ray (d8 damage, ignores armor) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Wings, Halo
As if in direct defiance of the decay and filth of the world, the gods granted
us the coutal. As if to say, “there is beauty, even in this grim place.” A
serpent in flight on jeweled wings, these beautiful creatures glow with a soft
light, as the sun does through stained glass. Bright, wise, and calm, a coutal
often knows many things and sees many more. You might be able to make a trade
with it in exchange for some favor. They seek to cleanse and to purge and to
make of this dark world a better one. Shame we have so few. The gods are cruel.
/Instinct/: To cleanse
    - Pass judgment on a person or place
    - Summon divine forces to cleanse
    - Offer information in exchange for service
** Crocodilian Group, Large
*Bite (d8+3 damage) 10 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious, Camouflage
It’s a really, really big crocodile. Seriously. So big. /Instinct/: To eat
    - Attack an unsuspecting victim
    - Escape into the water
    - Hold something tight in its jaws
** Doppelgänger Solitary, Devious, Intelligent
*Dagger (d6 damage) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Shapeshifting
Their natural form, if you ever see it, is hideous. Like a creature who stopped
growing part-way, before it decided it was elf or man or dwarf. Then again,
maybe that’s how you get to be the way a doppelgänger is—without form, without
shape to call their own, maybe all they really seek is a place to fit in. If you
go out into the world, when you come back home, make sure your friends are who
you think they are. They might, instead, be a doppelgänger and your friend might
be dead at the bottom of a well somewhere. Then again, depending on your
friends, that might be an improvement. /Instinct/: To infiltrate
    - Assume the shape of a person whose flesh it’s tasted
    - Use another’s identity to advantage
    - Leave someone’s reputation shattered
** Dragon Turtle Solitary, Huge, Cautious
*Bite (d10+3 damage) 20 HP 4 Armor*
*Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Shell, Amphibious
Bakunawa has a brother. Where she is quick to anger and hungry for gold, he is
slow and sturdy. She is a knife and he is a shield. A great turtle that lies in
the muck and mire for ages as they pass, mud piled upon his back—sometimes trees
and shrubs. Sometimes a whole misguided clan of goblins will build their huts
and cook their ratty meals on the shell of the dragon turtle. His snapping jaws
may be glacier-slow, but they can rend a castle wall. Careful where you tread.
/Instinct/: To resist change
    - Move forward implacably
    - Bring its full bulk to bear
    - Destroy structures and buildings
** Dragon Whelp Solitary, Small, Intelligent, Cautious, Hoarder
*Elemental breath (d10+2 damage) 16 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Near*
*Special Qualities:* Wings, Elemental Blood
What? Did you think they were all a mile long? Did you think they didn’t come
smaller than that? Sure, they may be no bigger than a dog and no smarter than an
ape, but a dragon whelp can still belch up a hellish ball of fire that’ll melt
your armor shut and drop you screaming into the mud. Their scales, too, are
softer than those of their bigger kin, but can still turn aside an arrow or
sword not perfectly aimed. Size is not the only measure of might. /Instinct/: To
grow in power
    - Start a lair, form a base of power
    - Call on family ties
    - Demand oaths of servitude
** Ekek Horde
*Talons (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Wing-arms
Ugly, wrinkled bird-folk, these. Once, maybe, in some ancient past, they were a
race of angelic men from on high, but now they eat rats that they fish from the
murk with talon-feet and devour with needle-teeth. They understand the tongues
of men and dwarves but speak in little more than gibbering tongues, mimicking
the words they hear with mocking laughter. It’s a chilling thing to see a beast
so close to man or bird but not quite either one. /Instinct/: To lash out
    - Attack from the air
    - Carry out the bidding of a more powerful creature
** Fire Eels Horde, Tiny
*Burning touch (d6-2 damage, ignores armor) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Hand*
*Special Qualities:* Flammable oil, aquatic
These strange creatures are no bigger or smarter than their mundane kin. They
have the same vicious nature. Over their relations they have one advantage—an
oily secretion that oozes from their skin. It makes them hard to catch. On top
of that, with a twist of their body they can ignite the stuff, leaving pools of
burning oil atop the surface of the water and roasting prey and predator alike.
I hear the slimy things make good ingredients for fire-resistant gear, but you
have to get your hands on one, first. /Instinct/: To ignite
    - Catch someone or something on fire (even underwater)
    - Consume burning prey
** Frogman Horde, Small, Intelligent
*Spear (d6 damage) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious
Croak croak croak. Little warty munchkins. Some wizard or godling’s idea of a
bad joke, these creatures are. They stand as men, dress in scavenged cloth and
hold court in their froggy villages. They speak a rumbling pidgin form of the
tongue of man and are constantly at war with their neighbors. They’re greedy and
stupid but clever enough when they need to defend themselves. Some say, too,
their priests have a remarkable skill at healing. Or maybe they’re just really,
really hard to kill. /Instinct/: To wage war
    - Launch an amphibious assault
    - Heal at a prodigious rate
** Hydra Solitary, Large
*Bite (d10+3 damage) 16 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Many heads, Only killed by a blow to the heart
A bit like a dragon, wingless though it may be. Heads, nine in number at birth,
spring from a muscled trunk and weave a sinuous pattern in the air. A hydra is
to be feared—a scaled terror of the marsh. The older ones, though, they have
more heads, for every failed attempt to murder it just makes it stronger. Cut
off a head and two more grow in its place. Only a strike, true and strong, to
the heart can end a hydra’s life. Not time or tide or any other thing but this.
/Instinct/: To grow
    - Attack many enemies at once
    - Regenerate a body part (especially a head)
** Kobold Horde, Small, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
*Spear (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Dragon connection
Some are wont to lump these little, rat-like dragon-men in with goblins and
orcs, bugbears and hobgoblins. They are smarter and wiser than their kin,
however. The kobolds are beholden slaves to dragons and were, in ancient times,
their lorekeepers and sorcerer-servants. Their clans, with names like Ironscale
and Whitewing, form around a dragon master and live to serve and do its bidding.
Spotting a kobold means more are near—and if more are near then a mighty dragon
cannot be far, either. /Instinct/: To serve dragons
    - Lay a trap
    - Call on dragons or draconic allies
    - Retreat and regroup
** Lizardman Group, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
*Spear (d8 damage) 6 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious
A traveling sorcerer once told me that lizardmen came before we did. That before
elves and dwarves and men built even the first of their wattle huts, a race of
proud lizard kings strode the land. That they lived in palaces of crystal and
worshipped their own scaly gods. Maybe that’s true and maybe it ain’t—now they
dwell in places men long forgot or abandoned, crafting tools from volcano-glass
and lashing against the works of the civilized world. Maybe they just want back
what they lost. /Instinct/: To destroy civilization
    - Ambush the unsuspecting
    - Launch an amphibious assault
** Medusa Solitary, Devious, Intelligent, Hoarder
*Claws (d6 damage) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Look turns you to stone
The medusa are children of a serpent-haired mother, birthing them in ancient
times to bear her name across the ages. They dwell near places of
civilization—luring folks to their caves with promises of beauty or riches
untold. Fine appreciators of art, the medusa curate strange collections of their
victims, terror or ecstasy frozen forever in stone. It satisfies their vanity to
know they were the last thing seen in so many lives. Arrogant, proud, and
spiteful, in their way, they seek what so many do—endless company. /Instinct/:
To collect
    - Turn a body part to stone with a look
    - Draw someone’s gaze
    - Show hidden terrible beauty
** Sahuagin Horde, Intelligent
*Endless teeth (d6+4 damage, 1 piercing) 3 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Forceful, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious
The shape and craft of men wedded to the hunger and the endless teeth of a
shark. Voracious and filled only with hate, these creatures will not stop until
all life has been consumed. They cannot be reasoned with, they cannot be
controlled or sated. They are hunger and bloodlust, driven up from the depths of
the sea to ravage coastal towns and swallow island villages. /Instinct/: To
spill blood
    - Bite off a limb
    - Hurl a poisoned spear
    - Frenzy at the sight of blood
** Sauropod Group, Huge, Cautious
*Trample (d10+5 damage) 18 HP 4 Armor*
*Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Armor plated body
Great lumbering beasts, they live in places long since forgotten by the thinking
races of the world. Gentle if unprovoked, but mighty if their ire is raised,
they trample smaller creatures with the care we might give to crushing an ant
beneath our boots. If you see one, drift by and gaze in awe, but do not wake the
giant. /Instinct/: To endure
    - Stampede
    - Knock something down
    - Unleash a deafening bellow
** Swamp Shambler Solitary, Large, Magical
*Lash (d10+1 damage) 23 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Swamp form
Some elementals are conjured up in sacred circles etched in chalk. Most, in
fact. There’s a sort of science to it. Others, though, aren’t so orderly—they
don’t fall under the carefully controlled assignments of fire, air, water, or
earth. Some are a natural confluence of vine and mire and fungus. They do not
think the way a man might think. They cannot be understood as one might
understand an elf. They simply are. Spirits of the swamp. Shamblers in the mud.
/Instinct/: To preserve and create swamps
    - Call on the swamp itself for aid
    - Meld into the swamp
    - Reassemble into a new form
** Troll Solitary, Large
*Club (d10+3 damage) 20 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Regeneration
Tall. Real tall. Eight or nine feet when they’re young or weak. Covered all over
in warty, tough skin, too. Big teeth, stringy hair like swamp moss and long,
dirty nails. Some are green, some gray, some black. They’re clannish and hateful
of each other, not to mention all the rest of us. Near impossible to kill, too,
unless you’ve fire or acid to spare—cut a limb off and watch. In a few days,
you’ve got two trolls where you once had one. A real serious problem, as you can
imagine. /Instinct/: To smash
    - Undo the effects of an attack (unless caused by a weakness, your call)
    - Hurl something or someone
** Will-o-wisp Solitary, Tiny, Magical
*Ray (w[2d8-2] damage) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Near*
*Special Qualities:* Body of light
Spot a lantern floating in the darkness, lost traveler in the swamp. Hope—a
beacon of shimmering light. You call out to it, but there’s no answer. It begins
to fade and so you follow, sloshing through the muck, tiring at the chase,
hoping you’re being led to safety. Such a sad tale that always ends in doom.
These creatures are a mystery—some say they’re ghosts, others beacons of faerie
light. Nobody knows the truth. They are cruel, however. All can agree on that.
/Instinct/: To misguide
    - Lead someone astray
    - Clear a path to the worst place possible
* Undead Legions
** Abomination Solitary, Large, Construct, Terrifying
*Slam (d10+3 damage) 20 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Many limbs, heads, and so on
Corpses sewn onto corpses make up the bulk of these shambling masses of dark
magic. Most undead are crafted to be controlled—made to serve some purpose like
building a tower or serving as guardians. Not so the abomination. The last
aspect of the ritual used to grant fire to their hellish limbs invokes a hatred
so severe that the abomination knows but one task: to tear and rend at the very
thing it cannot have—life. Many students of the black arts learn to their mortal
dismay the most important fact about these hulks; an abomination knows no
master. /Instinct/: To end life
    - Tear flesh apart
    - Spill forth putrid guts
** Banshee Solitary, Magical, Intelligent
*Scream (d10 damage) 16 HP 0 Armor*
*Near*
*Special Qualities:* Insubstantial
Come away from an encounter with one of these vengeful spirits merely deaf and
count yourself lucky for the rest of your peaceful, silent days. Often mistaken
at first glance for a ghost or wandering spirit, the banshee reveals a far more
deadly talent for sonic assault when angered. And her anger comes easy. A victim
of betrayal (often by a loved one) the banshee makes known her displeasure with
a roar or scream that can putrefy flesh and rend the senses. If you can help her
get her vengeance, they say she might grant rewards. Whether the affection of a
spurned spirit is a thing you’d want, well, that’s another question. /Instinct/:
To get revenge
    - Drown out all other sound with a ceaseless scream
    - Unleash a skull-splitting noise
    - Disappear into the mists
** Devourer Solitary, Large, Intelligent, Hoarder
*Smash (d10+3 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
Most folk know that the undead feed on flesh. The warmth, blood and living
tissue continue their unholy existence. This is true for most of the mindless
dead, animated by black sorcery. Not so the devourer. When a particularly wicked
person (often a manipulator of men, an apostate priest or the like) dies in a
gruesome way, the dark powers of Dungeon World might bring them back to a kind
of life. The devourer, however, does not feed on the flesh of men or elves. The
devourer eats souls. It kills with a pleasure only the sentient can enjoy and in
the moments of its victims’ expiry, draws breath like a drowning man and
swallows a soul. What does it mean to have your soul eaten by such a creature?
None dare ask for fear of finding out. /Instinct/: To feast on souls
    - Devour or trap dying soul
    - Bargain for a soul’s return
** Dragonbone Solitary, Huge
*Bite (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 20 HP 2 Armor*
*Reach, Messy*
Mystical sorcerers debate: is this creature truly undead or is it a golem made
of a particularly rare and blasphemous material? The bones, sinews and scales of
a dead dragon make up this bleak automaton. Winged but flightless, dragon-shaped
but without the mighty fire of such a noble thing, the dragonbone serves its
master with a twisted devotion and is often set to assault the keeps and towers
of rival necromancers. It would take a being of some considerable evil to twist
the remains of a dragon thus. /Instinct/: To serve
    - Attack unrelentingly
** Draugr Horde, Organized
*Rusty sword (d6+1 damage) 7 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Icy touch
In the Nordemark, the men and women tell tales in their wooden halls of a place
where the noble dead go. A mead hall atop their heavenly mountain where men of
valor go to await the final battle for the world. It is a goodly place. It is a
place where one hopes to go after death. And the inglorious dead? Those who fall
to poison or in an act of cowardice, warriors though they may be? Well, those
mead halls aren’t open to all and sundry. Some come back, frozen and twisted and
empowered by jealous rage and wage their eternal war not on the forces of giants
or trolls but on the towns of the men they once knew. /Instinct/: To take from
the living
    - Freeze flesh
    - Call on the unworthy dead
** Ghost Solitary, Devious, Terrifying
*Phantom touch (d6 damage) 16 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Insubstantial
Every culture tells the story the same way. You live, you love or you hate, you
win or you lose, you die somehow you’re not too fond of and here you are,
ghostly and full of disappointment and what have you. Some people take it upon
themselves, brave and kindly folks, to seek out the dead and help them pass to
their rightful rest. You can find them, most times, down at the tavern drinking
away the terrors they’ve seen or babbling to themselves in the madhouse. Death
takes a toll on the living, no matter how you come by it. /Instinct/: To haunt
    - Reveal the terrifying nature of death
    - Haunt a place of importance
    - Offer information from the other side, at a price
** Ghoul Group
*Talons (d8 damage, 1 piercing) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Messy*
Hunger. Hunger hunger hunger. Desperate clinging void-stomach-emptiness hunger.
Sharp talons to rend flesh and teeth to tear and crack bones and suck out the
soft marrow inside. Vomit up hate and screaming jealous anger and charge on
twisted legs—scare the living flesh and sweeten it ever more with the stink of
fear. Feast. Peasant or knight, wizard, sage, prince, or priest all make for
such delicious meat. /Instinct/: To eat
    - Gnaw off a body part
    - Gain the memories of their meal
** Lich Solitary, Magical, Intelligent, Cautious, Hoarder, Construct
*Magical Force (d10+3 damage, ignores armor) 16 HP 5 Armor*
*Near, Far*
“At the end, they give you a scroll and a jeweled medallion to commemorate your
achievements. Grand Master of Abjuration, I was called, then. Old man. Weak and
wizened and just a bit too senile for them—those jealous halfwits. Barely
apprentices, and they called themselves The New Council. It makes me sick, or
would, if I still could be. They told me it was an honor and I would be
remembered forever. It was like listening to my own eulogy. Fitting, in a way,
don’t you think? It took me another ten years to learn the rituals and another
four to collect the material and you see before you the fruits of my labor. I
endure. I live. I will see the death of this age and the dawn of the next. It
pains me to have to do this, but, you see, you cannot be permitted to endanger
my research. When you meet Death, say hello for me, would you?” /Instinct/: To
un-live
    - Cast a perfected spell of death or destruction
    - Set a ritual or great working into motion
    - Reveal a preparation or plan already completed
** Mohrg Group
*Bite (d8 damage) 10 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
You never get away with murder. Not really. You might evade the law, might
escape your own conscience in the end and die, fat and happy in a mansion
somewhere. When the gods themselves notice your misdeeds, though, that’s where
your luck runs out and a mohrg is born. The mohrg is a skeleton—flesh and skin
and hair all rotted away. All but their guts—their twisted, knotted guts still
spill from their bellies, magically preserved and often wrapped, noose-like,
about their necks. They do not think, exactly, but they suffer. They kill and
wreak havoc and their souls do not rest. Such is the punishment, both on them
for the crime and on all mankind for daring to murder one another. The gods are
just and they are harsh. /Instinct/: To wreak havoc
    - Rage
    - Add to their collection of guts
** Mummy Solitary, Divine, Hoarder
*Smash (d10+2 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
There are cultures who revere the dead. They do not bury them in the cold earth
and mourn their passing. These people spend weeks preparing the sacred corpse
for its eternal rest. Temples, pyramids, and great vaults of stone are built to
house them and are populated with slaves, pets and gold. The better to live in
luxury beyond the Black Gates, no? Do not be tempted by these vaults—oh, I know
that greedy look! Heed my warnings or risk a terrible fate, for the honored dead
do not wish to be disturbed. Thievery will only raise their ire—don’t say I did
not warn you! /Instinct/: To enjoy eternal rest
    - Curse them
    - Wrap them up
    - Rise again
** Nightwing Horde, Stealthy
*Rend (d6 damage) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
Scholars of the necromantic arts will tell you that the appellation “undead”
applies not only to those who have lived, died, and been returned to a sort of
partway living state. It is the proper name of any creature whose energy
originates beyond the Black Gates. The creature men call the nightwing is one
such—empowered by the negative light of Death’s domain. Taking the shape of
massive, shadowy, winged creatures (some more bat-like, some like vultures,
others like some ancient, leathery things) nightwings travel in predatory
flocks, swooping down to strip the flesh from cattle, horses and unlucky
peasants out past curfew. Watch the night sky for their red eyes. Listen for
their screeching call. And hope to the gods you have something to hide under
until they pass. /Instinct/: To hunt
    - Attack from the night sky
    - Fly away with prey
** Shadow Horde, Large, Magical, Construct
*Shadow touch (d6+1 damage) 11 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Shadow Form
We call to the elements. We call on fire, ever-burning. We summon water,
life-giving. We beseech the earth, stable-standing. We cry to the air,
forever-changing. These elements we recognize and give our thanks but ask to
pass. The elemental we call upon this night knows another name. We call upon the
element of Night. Shadow, we name you. Death’s messenger and black assassin, we
claim for our own. Accept our sacrifice and do our bidding ’til the morning
come. /Instinct/: To darken
    - Snuff out light
    - Spawn another shadow from the dead
** Sigben Horde, Large, Construct
*Tail whip (d6+1 damage) 11 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Vampire spawn
“Aswang-hound and hopping whip-tail! Sent by vampires on their two, twisted
legs, these ugly things look like the head of a rat or a crocodile, maybe, furry
though and sharp of tooth. They have withered wings, but cannot use them and
long, whipping tails, spurred with poison tips. Stupid, vengeful and mischievous
they cause all kinds of chaos when let out of the strange clay jars in which
they’re born. Only a vampire could love such a wretched thing.” /Instinct/: To
disturb
    - Poison them
    - Do a vampire’s bidding
** Skeleton Horde
*Slam (d6 damage) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
Dem bones, dem bones, dem dry bones. /Instinct/: To take the semblance of life
    - Act out what it did in life
    - Snuff out the warmth of life
    - Reconstruct from miscellaneous bones
** Spectre Solitary, Hoarder
*Withering touch (d10 damage) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Insubstantial
For some folk, when they pass, Death himself cannot release their grip on the
places they love most. A priest whose devotion to the temple is greater than
that of his god. A banking guild official who cannot bear to part with his
vault. A drunk and his favorite tavern. All make excellent spectres. They act
not out of the usual hunger that drives the undead, but jealousy. Jealousy that
anyone else might come to love their home as much as they do and drive them out.
These places belong to them and these invisible spirits will kill before they’ll
let anyone send them to their rest. /Instinct/: To drive life from a place
    - Turn their haunt against a creature
    - Bring the environment to life
** Vampire Group, Stealthy, Organized, Intelligent
*Supernatural force (d8+5 damage, 1 piercing) 10 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Changing form, ancient mind
We fear them, because they call to us. So much like us, or how we hope to be:
beautiful, passionate, and powerful. They are drawn to us for what they cannot
be: warm, kind, and alive. These tormented souls can only hope, at most, to pass
their dreadful curse along. Every time they feed they run the risk of passing
along their torture to another and in each one lives the twisted seed of its
creator. Vampires beget vampires. Suffering begets suffering. Do not be drawn in
by their seduction or you may be given their gift—a crown of shadows and the
chains of eternal undying grief. /Instinct/: To manipulate
    - Charm someone
    - Feed on their blood
    - Retreat to plan again
** Wight-Wolf Horde, Organized, Intelligent
*Pounce (d6+1 damage 1 piercing) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Shadow form
Like the nightwing, the wight-wolf is a creature not spawned in our world.
Somehow slipping the seals of the Black Gates of Death, these spirits take the
shape of massive hounds or shadowy wolves and hunt the living for sport. They
travel in packs, led by a mighty alpha, but bear a kind of intelligence unknown
to true canines. Their wild hunts draw the attention of intelligent
undead—liches, vampires and the like—who will sometimes make pacts with the
alpha and serve a grim purpose together. Listen for the baying of the hounds of
Death and pray that they do not howl for you. /Instinct/: To hunt
    - Encircle prey
    - Summon the pack
** Zombie Horde
*Bite (d6 damage) 11 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
When there’s no more room in Hell… /Instinct/: Braaaaaains
    - Attack with overwhelming numbers
    - Corner them
    - Gain strength from the dead, spawn more zombies
* Dark Woods
** Assassin Vine Solitary, Stealthy, Amorphous
*Thorns (d10 damage, 1 piercing) 15 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Plant
Among the animals there exists a clear division ‘tween hunter and hunted. All it
takes is a glance to know—by fangs and glowing eyes or claws or venomous
sting—which of the creatures of this world are meant to kill and which stand to
be killed. Such a split, if you have the eyes to see it, cuts the world of
leaves and flowers in twain, as well. Druids in their forest circles know it.
Rangers, too, might spot such a plant before it’s too late. Lay folk, though,
they wander where they oughtn’t—paths into the deep woods covered in creeping
vines and with a snap, these hungry ropes snap tight, dragging their meaty prey
into the underbrush. Mind your feet, traveller. /Instinct/: To grow
    - Shoot forth new growth
    - Attack the unwary
** Blink Dog Group, Small, Magical, Organized
*Bite (d8 damage) 6 HP 4 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Illusion
Now you see it, now you don’t. Hounds once owned by a sorcerer lord and imbued
with a kind of illusory cloak, they escaped into the woods around his lair and
began to breed with wolves and wild dogs of the forest. You can spot them, if
you’re lucky, by the glittering silver of their coats and their strange,
ululating howls. They have a remarkable talent for being not quite where they
appear to be and use it to take down prey much stronger than themselves. If you
find yourself facing a pack of blink dogs you might as well close your eyes and
fight. You’ll have an easier time when not betrayed by your natural sight. By
such sorceries are the natural places of the world polluted with unnatural
things. /Instinct/: To hunt
    - Give the appearance of being somewhere they’re not
    - Summon the pack
    - Move with amazing speed
** Centaur Horde, Large, Organized, Intelligent
*Bow (d6+2 damage, 1 piercing) 11 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Near*
*Special Qualities:* Half-horse, Half-man
“It will be a gathering of clans unseen in this age. Call Stormhoof and
Brightspear. Summon Whitemane and Ironflanks. Sound the horn and we shall begin
our meeting—we shall speak the words and bind our people together. Too long have
the men cut the ancient trees for their ships. The elves are weak and cowardly,
friend to these mannish slime. It will be a cleansing fire from the darkest
woods. Raise the red banner of war! Today we strike back against these apes and
retake what is ours!” /Instinct/: To rage
    - Overrun them
    - Fire a perfect bullseye
    - Move with unrelenting speed
** Chaos Ooze Solitary, Planar, Terrifying, Amorphous
*Warping touch (d10 damage ignores armor) 23 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Ooze, Fragments of other planes embedded in it
The barrier between Dungeon World and the elemental planes is not, as you might
hope, a wall of stone. It’s much more porous. Places where the civil races do
not often tread can sometimes, how to put this, spring a leak. Like a dam come
just a little loose. Bits and pieces of the chaos spill out. Sometimes, they’ll
congeal like an egg on a pan—that’s where we get the material for many of the
Guild’s magical trinkets. Useful, right? Sometimes, though, it squirms and
squishes around a bit and stays that way, warping all it touches into some
other, strange form. Chaos begets chaos, and it grows. /Instinct/: To change
    - Cause a change in appearance or substance
    - Briefly bridge the planes
** Cockatrice Group, Small, Hoarder
*Beak (d8 damage) 6 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Stone touch
“I ain’t ever seen such a thing, sir. Rodrick thought it a chicken, maybe. Poor
Rodrick. I figured it to be a lizard of a sort, though he was right—it had a
beak and gray feathers like a chicken. Right, well, see, we found it in the
woods, in a nest at the foot of a tree while we were out with the sow. Looking
for mushrooms, sir. I told Rodrick we were—yes, sir, right sir, the bird—see, it
was glaring at Rodrick and he tried to scare it off with a stick to steal the
eggs but the thing pecked his hand. Quick it was, too. I tried to get him away
but he just got slower and slower and…yes, as you see him now, sir. All frozen
up like when we left the dog out overnight in winter two years back. Poor,
stupid Rodrick. Weren’t no bird nor lizard, were it, sir?”/Instinct/: To defend
the nest
    - Start a slow transformation to stone
** Dryad Solitary, Magical, Intelligent, Devious,
*Crushing vines (w[2d8]damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Plant
More beautiful by far than any man or woman born in the civil realms. To gaze
upon one is to fall in love. Deep and punishing, too. Thing is, they don’t
love—not the fleshy folk who often find them, anyway. Their love is a primal
thing, married to the woods—to a great oak that serves as home and mother and
sacred place to them. It’s a curse to see one, too, they’ll never love you back.
No matter what you do. No matter how you pledge yourself to them, they’ll always
spurn you. If ever their oak comes to harm, you’ve not only the dryad’s wrath to
contend with, but in every nearby village there’s a score of men with a secret
longing in their heart, ready to murder you where you sleep for just a smile
from such a creature. /Instinct/: To love nature passionately
    - Entice a mortal
    - Merge into a tree
    - Turn nature against them
** Eagle Lord Group, Large, Organized, Intelligent
*Talons (b[2d8]+1 damage, 1 piercing) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Mighty wings
Some the size of horses. Bigger, even—the kings and queens of the eagles. Their
cry pierces the mountain sky and woe to those who fall under the shadow of their
mighty wings. The ancient wizards forged a pact with them in the primordial
days. Men would take the plains and valleys and leave the mountaintops to the
eagle lords. These sacred pacts should be honored, lest they set their talons
into you. Lucky are the elves, for the makers of their treaties yet live and
when danger comes to elvish lands, the eagle lords often serve as spies and
mounts for them. Long-lived and proud, some might be willing to trade their
ancient secrets for the right price, too. /Instinct/: To rule the heights
    - Attack from the sky
    - Pull someone into the air
    - Call on ancient oaths
** Elvish Warrior Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Sword (b[2d6] damage) 3 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Sharp sense
”As with all things they undertake, the elves approach war as an art. I saw them
fight, once. The Battle of Astrid’s Veil. Yes, I am that old, boy, now hush. A
warrior-maiden, she was clad in plate that shone like the winter sky. White hair
streaming and a pennant of ocean blue tied to her spear. She seemed to glide
between the trees the way an angel might, striking out and bathing her blade in
blood that steamed in the cold air. I never felt so small before. I trained with
the master-at-arms of Battlemoore, you know. I’ve held a sword longer than
you’ve been alive, boy, and in that one moment I knew that my skill meant
nothing. Thank the gods the elves were with us then. A more beautiful and
terrible thing I have never seen.” /Instinct/: To seek perfection
    - Strike at a weak point
    - Set ancient plans in motion
    - Use the woods to advantage
** Elvish High Arcanist Solitary, Magical, Intelligent, Organized
*Arcane fire (d10 damage ignores armor) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Sharp senses
True elvish magic isn’t like the spells of men. Mannish wizardry is all rotes
and formulas. They cheat to find the arcane secrets that resound all around
them. They are deaf to the arcane symphony that sings in the woods. Elvish magic
requires a fine ear to hear that symphony and the voice with which to sing. To
harmonize with what is already resounding. Men bind the forces of magic to their
will; Elves simply pluck the strings and hum along. The High Arcanists, in a
way, have become more and less than any elf. The beat of their blood is the
throbbing of all magic in this world. /Instinct/: To unleash power
    - Work the magic that nature demands
    - Cast forth the elements
** Griffin Group, Large, Organized
*Talons (d8+3 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
On first glance, one might mistake the griffin for another magical mistake like
the manticore or the chimera. It looks the part, doesn’t it? These creatures
have the regal haughtiness of a lion and the arrogant bearing of an eagle, but
they temper those with the unshakeable loyalty of both. To earn the friendship
of a griffin is to have an ally all your living days. Truly a gift, that. If
you’re ever lucky enough to meet one be respectful and deferential above all
else. It may not seem it but they can perceive the subtlest slights and will
answer them with a sharp beak and talons. /Instinct/: To serve allies
    - Judge someone’s worthiness
    - Carry an ally aloft
    - Strike from above
** Hill Giant Group, Huge, Intelligent, Organized
*Thrown rocks (d8+3 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Reach, Near, Far, Forceful*
Ever seen an ogre before? Bigger than that. Dumber and meaner, too. Hope you
like having cows thrown at you. /Instinct/: Ruin everything.
    - Throw something
    - Do something stupid
    - Shake the earth
** Ogre Group, Large, Intelligent
*Club (d8+5 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
A tale, then. Somewhere in the not-so-long history of the mannish race there was
a divide. In days when men were merely dwellers-in-the-mud with no magic to call
their own, they split in two: one camp left their caves and the dark forests and
built the first city to honor the gods. The others, a wild and savage lot,
retreated into darkness. They grew, there. In the deep woods a grim loathing for
their softer kin gave them strength. They found dark gods of their own, there in
the woods and hills. Ages passed and they bred tall and strong and full of hate.
We have forged steel and they match it with their savagery. We may have
forgotten our common roots, but somewhere, deep down, the ogres remember.
/Instinct/: To return the world to darker days
    - Destroy something
    - Fly into a rage
    - Take something by force
** Razor Boar Solitary
*Tusks (d10 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Messy*
The tusks of the razor boar shred metal plate like so much tissue. Voracious,
savage and unstoppable, they tower over their mundane kin. To kill one? A
greater trophy of bravery and skill is hard to name, though I hear a razor boar
killed the Drunkard King in a single thrust. You think you’re a better hunter
than he? /Instinct/: To shred
    - Rip them apart
    - Rend armor and weapons
** Satyr Group, Devious, Magical, Hoarder
*Charge (w[2d8] damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Enchantment
One of only a very few creatures to be found in the old woods that don’t
outright want to maim, kill, or eat us. They dwell in glades pierced by the sun,
and dance on their funny goat-legs to enchanting music played on pipes made of
bone and silver. They smile easily and, so long as you please them with jokes
and sport, will treat our kind with friendliness. They’ve a mean streak, though,
so if you cross them, make haste elsewhere; very few things hold a grudge like
the stubborn satyr. /Instinct/: To enjoy
    - Pull others into revelry through magic
    - Force gifts upon them
    - Play jokes with illusions and tricks
** Sprite Horde, Tiny, Stealthy, Magical, Devious, Intelligent
*Dagger (w[2d4] damage) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Hand*
*Special Qualities:* Wings, Fey Magic
I’d classify them elementals, except that “being annoying” isn’t an element.
/Instinct/: To play tricks
    - Play a trick to expose someone’s true nature
    - Confuse their senses
    - Craft an illusion
** Treant Group, Huge, Intelligent, Amorphous
*Walloping branches (d10+5 damage) 21 HP 4 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Wooden
Old and tall and thick of bark
walk amidst the tree-lined dark
Strong and slow and forest-born,
treants anger quick, we warn
if to woods with axe ye go
know the treants be thy foe
/Instinct/: To protect nature
    - Move with implacable strength
    - Set down roots
    - Spread old magic
** Werewolf Solitary, Intelligent
*Bite (d10+2 damage, 1 piercing) 12 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Weak to silver
“Beautiful, isn’t it? The moon, I mean. She’s watching us, you know? Her pretty
silver eyes watch us while we sleep. Mad, too—like all the most beautiful ones.
If she were a woman, I’d bend my knee and make her my wife on the spot. No, I
didn’t ask you here to speak about her, though. The chains? For your safety, not
mine. I’m cursed, you see. You must have suspected. The sorcerer-kings called it
“lycanthropy” in their day—passed on by a bite to make more of our kind. No, I
could find no cure. Please, don’t be scared. You have the arrows I gave you?
Silver, yes. Ah, you begin to understand. Don’t cry, sister. You must do this
for me. I cannot bear more blood on my hands. You must end this. For me.”
/Instinct/: To shed the appearance of civilization
    - Transform to pass unnoticed as beast or man
    - Strike from within
    - Hunt like man and beast
** Worg Horde, Organized
*Bite (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
As horses are to the civil races, so go the worg to the goblins. Mounts, fierce
in battle, ridden by only the bravest and most dangerous, are found and bred in
the forest primeval to serve the goblins in their wars on men. The only safe
worg is a pup, separated from its mother. If you can find one of these, or make
orphans of a litter with a sharp sword, you’ve got what could become a loyal
protector or hunting hound in time. Train it well, mind you, for the worg are
smart and never quite free of their primal urges. /Instinct/: To serve
    - Carry a rider into battle
    - Give its rider an advantage
* Ravenous Hordes
** Formian Drone Horde, Organized, Cautious
*Bite (d6 damage) 7 HP 4 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Hive connection, Insectoid
With good cause, they say that these creatures (like all insects, really) are
claimed by the powers of Law. They are order made flesh—a perfectly stratified
society in which every larva, hatchling and adult knows its place in the great
hive. The formian is some strange intersection of men and ants. (Though there
are winged tribes that look like wasps out in the Western Desert, I’ve heard.
And some with great sawtooth arms like mantids in the forests of the east.)
Tall, with a hard shell and a harder mind, these particular formians are the
bottom caste. They work the hills and honeycombs with single-minded joy that can
be known only by such an alien mind. /Instinct/: To follow orders
    - Raise the alarm
    - Create value for the hive
    - Assimilate
** Formian Taskmaster Group, Organized, Intelligent
*Spiked whip (d8 damage) 6 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Hive connection, Insectoid
It takes two hands to rule an empire: one to wield the scepter and one to crack
the whip. These ant-folk are that whip. Lucky for them, with two extra arms,
that’s a lot of whip to crack. They oversee the vast swarms of worker drones
that set to build the mighty caverns and ziggurats that dot the places that
formians can be found. One in a hundred, these brutes stand two or three feet
taller than their pale, near-mindless kin and have a sharper, crueler wit to
match. They’ll often ignore the soft races (as we’re known) if we don’t
interfere in a project, but get in the way of The Great Work and expect nothing
less than their full attention. You don’t want their full attention. /Instinct/:
To command
    - Order drones into battle
    - Set great numbers in motion
** Formian Centurion Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Barbed spear (b[2d6]+2 damage) 7 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Hive connection, Insectoid, Wings
Whether in the form of a legionnaire, part of the formian standing army, or as a
praetorian guard to the queen, every formian hive contains a great number of
these most dangerous insectoids. Darker in carapace, often scarred with furrows
and the ceremonial markings that set them apart from their drones, the formian
centurions are their fighting force and rightly so. Born, bred and living for
the singular purpose of killing the enemies of their hive, they fight with one
mind and a hundred swords. Thus far, the powers of Law have seen fit to spare
mankind a great war with these creatures, but we’ve seen them in
skirmish—descending sometimes on border towns with their wings flickering in the
heat or spilling up from a sandy mound to wipe clean a newly-dug mine. Theirs is
an orderly bloodshed, committed with no pleasure but the completion of a goal.
/Instinct/: To fight as ordered
    - Advance as one
    - Summon reinforcements
    - Give a life for the hive
** Formian Queen Solitary, Huge, Organized, Intelligent, Hoarder
*Crushing mandibles (d10+5 damage) 24 HP 3 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Hive connection, Insectoid
At the heart of every hive, no matter its size or kind, lives a queen. As large
as any giant, she sits protected by her guard, served by every drone and
taskmaster with her own, singular purpose: to spread her kind and grow the hive.
To birth the eggs. To nurture. We do not understand the minds of these creatures
but it is known they can communicate with their children, somehow, over vast
distances and that they begin to teach them the ways of earth and stone and war
while still pale and wriggling larvae, without a word. To kill one is to set
chaos on the hive; without their queen, the rest turn on one another in a mad,
blind rage. /Instinct/: To spread formians
    - Call every formian it spawned
    - Release a half-formed larval mutation
    - Organize and issue orders
** Gnoll Tracker Group, Organized, Intelligent
*Bow (d8 damage) 6 HP 1 Armor*
*Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Scent-tracker
Once they scent your blood, you can’t escape. Not without intervention from the
gods, or the duke’s rangers at least. The desert scrub is a dangerous place to
go exploring on your own and if you fall and break your leg or eat the wrong
cactus, well, you’ll be lucky if you die of thirst before the gnolls find you.
They prefer their prey alive, see—cracking bones and the screams of the dying
lend a sort of succulence to a meal. Sickening creatures, no? They’ll hunt you,
slow and steady, as you die. If you hear laughter in the desert wind, well, best
pray Death comes to take you before they do. /Instinct/: To prey on weakness
    - Doggedly track prey
    - Strike at a moment of weakness
** Gnoll Emissary Solitary, Divine, Intelligent, Organized
*Ceremonial dagger (d10+2 damage) 18 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Scent
Oh, an emissary! How nice. I suspect you didn’t know the gnolls had ambassadors,
did you? Yes, even these mangy hyenas have to make nice sometimes. No, no, not
with us. Nor the dwarves, neither. No, the emissary is the one, among his
packmates, who trucks directly with their dripping demon lord. Frightening? Too
right. Every hound has a master with his hand on the chain. This gnoll hears his
master’s voice. Hears it and obeys. /Instinct/: To share divine insight
    - Pass on demonic influence
    - Drive the pack into a fervor
** Gnoll Alpha Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
*Sword (b[2d10] damage, 1 piercing) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Scent
Every pack has its top dog. Bigger, maybe—that’d be the simplest way. Often,
though, with these lank and filthy mutts, it’s not about size or sharp teeth but
about cruelty. About a willingness to kill your brothers and eat them while the
pack watches. Willingness to desecrate the pack in a way that cows them to you.
If they’re that awful to each other—to their living kin—think about how they
must view us. It’s hard to be mere meat in a land of carnivores. /Instinct/: To
drive the pack
    - Demand obedience
    - Send the pack to hunt
** Orc Bloodwarrior Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Jagged blade (d6+2 damage, 1 piercing) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Messy*
The orcish horde is a savage, bloodthirsty, and hateful collection of tribes.
There are myths and stories that tell of the origin of their rage—a demon curse,
a homeland destroyed, elven magic gone wrong—but the truth has been lost to
time. Every able orc, be it man or woman, child or elder, swears fealty to the
warchief and their tribe and bears the jagged blade of a bloodwarrior. Men are
trained to fight and kill—orcs are born to it. /Instinct/: To fight
    - Fight with abandon
    - Revel in destruction
** Orc Berserker Solitary, Large, Divine, Intelligent, Organized
*Cleaver (d10+5 damage) 20 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Mutations
Stained in the unholy ritual of Anointing By The Night’s Blood, some warriors of
the horde rise to a kind of twisted knighthood. They trade their sanity for this
honor, stepping halfway into a world of swirling madness. This makes berserkers
the greatest of their tribe, though as time passes, the chaos spreads. The rare
berserker that lives more than a few years becomes horrible and twisted, growing
horns or an extra arm with which to grasp the iron cleavers they favor in
battle. /Instinct/: To rage
    - Fly into a frenzy
    - Unleash chaos
** Orc Breaker Solitary, Large
*Hammer (d10+3 damage ignores armor) 16 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
“Before you set out across the hordeland, brave sir, hark a moment to the tale
of Sir Regnus. Regnus was like you, sir—a paladin of the Order, all a-shine in
his plated armor and with a shield as tall as a man. Proud he was of it,
too—Mirrorshield, he called himself. Tale goes that he’d set his eyes on
rescuing some lost priest, a kidnap from the abbey on the borders. Regnus came
across some orcs in his travels, a dozen or so, and thought, as one might, that
they’d be no match. Battle was joined and all was well until one of them orcs
emerged from the fray with a hammer bigger than any man ought to be able to
wield. Built more like an ogre or a troll, they say it was, and with a single
swing, it crushed Regnus to the ground, shield and all. It were no ordinary orc,
they say. It were a breaker. They can’t make plate of their own, see, so maybe
it’s jealousy drives these burly things to crush and shatter the way they do.
Effective tactic, though. Careful out there.” /Instinct/: To smash
    - Destroy armor or protection
    - Lay low the mighty
** Orc One-Eye Group, Divine, Magical, Intelligent, Organized
*Inflict Wounds (d8+2 damage ignores armor) 6 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* One eye
In the name of He of Riven Sight and by the First Sacrifice of Elf-Flesh do we
invoke the Old Powers. By the Second Sacrifice, I make my claim to what is
mine—the dark magic of Night. In His image, I walk the path to Gor-sha-thak, the
Iron Gallows! I call to the runes! I call to the clouded sky! Take this mortal
organ, eat of the flesh of our enemy and give me what is mine! /Instinct/: To
hate
    - Rend flesh with divine magic
    - Take an eye
    - Make a sacrifice and grow in power
** Orc Shaman Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
*Elemental blast (d10 damage ignores armor) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Elemental power
The orcs are as old a race as any. They cast bones in the dirt and called to the
gods in the trees and stone as the elves built their first cities. They have
waged wars, conquered kingdoms, and fallen into corruption in the aeons it took
for men to crawl from their caves and dwarves to first see the light of the sun.
Fitting, then, that the old ways still hold. They summon the powers of the world
to work, to fight and to protect their people, as they have since the first
nights. /Instinct/: To strengthen orc-kind
    - Give protection of earth
    - Give power of fire
    - Give swiftness of water
    - Give clarity of air
** Orc Slaver Horde, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
*Whip (d6 damage) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
Red sails fly in the southern sea. Red sails and ships of bone, old wood and
iron. The warfleet of the horde. Orcs down that way have taken to the sea,
harassing island towns and stealing away with fishermen and their kin. It’s said
the custom is spreading north and the orcs learn the value of free work. Taken
to it like a sacred duty—especially if they can get their hands on elves. Hard
to think of a grimmer fate than to live out your life on an orcish galley, back
bent under the lash. /Instinct/: To take
    - Take a captive
    - Pin someone under a net
    - Drug them
** Orc Shadowhunter Solitary, Stealthy, Magical, Intelligent
*Poisoned dagger (d10 damage, 1 piercing) 10 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Shadow cloak
Not every attack by orcs is torches and screaming and enslavement. Among those
who follow He of Riven Sight, poison and murder-in-the-dark are considered
sacred arts. Enter the shadowhunter. Orcs cloaked in Night’s magic who slip into
camps, towns and temples and end the lives of those within. Do not be so
distracted by the howling of the berserkers that you don’t notice the knife at
your back. /Instinct/: To kill in darkness
    - Poison them
    - Melt into the shadows
    - Cloak them in darkness
** Orc Warchief Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
*Iron Sword of Ages (b[2d10]+2 damage) 16 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* One-Eye blessings, Shaman blessings, Divine protection from
 mortal harm
There are chiefs and there are leaders of the tribes among the orcs. There are
those who rise to seize power and fall under the machinations of their foes.
There is but one Warchief. One orc in all the horde who stands above the rest,
bearing the blessings of the One-Eyes and the Shamans both. But one who walks
with the elements under Night. But one who bears the Iron Sword of Ages and
carries the ancient grudge against the civil races on his shoulders. The
Warchief is to be respected, to be obeyed and above all else, to be feared. All
glory to the Warchief. /Instinct/: To lead
    - Start a war
    - Make a show of power
    - Enrage the tribes
** Triton Spy Solitary, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
*Trident (w[2d10] damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Near*
*Special Qualities:* Aquatic
A fishing village caught one in their net, some time ago. Part a man and part
some scaly sea creature, it spoke in a broken, spy-learned form of the common
tongue before it suffocated in the open air. It told the fishermen of a coming
tide, an inescapable swell of the power of some deep-sea god and that the triton
empire would rise up and drag the land down into the ocean. The tale spread and
now, when fishermen sail the choppy seas, they watch and worry that the dying
triton’s tales were true. That there are powers deep below that watch and wait.
They fear the tide is coming in. /Instinct/: To spy on the surface world
    - Reveal their secrets
    - Strike at weakness
** Triton Tidecaller Group, Divine, Magical, Intelligent
*Waves (d8+2 damage, ignores armor) 6 HP 2 Armor*
*Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Aquatic, Mutations
Part priest, part outcast among their kind, the tidecaller speaks with the voice
of the deeps. They can be known by their mutations—transparent skin, perhaps, or
rows of teeth like a shark. Glowing eyes or fingertips, angler-lights in the
darkness of their underwater kingdom. They speak in a strange tongue that can
call and command creatures of the sea. They ride wild hippocampi and cast
strange spells that rot through the wooden decks of ships or encrust them with
barnacles heavy enough to sink. It is the tidecallers who come, now, back to the
cities of the triton, bearing word that the prophecy is coming to pass. The
world of men will drown in icy brine. The tidecallers speak and the lords begin
to listen. /Instinct/: To bring on The Flood
    - Cast a spell of water and destruction
    - Command beasts of the sea
    - Reveal divine proclamation
** Triton Sub-Mariner Group, Organized, Intelligent
*Harpoon (b[2d8] damage) 6 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Aquatic
The triton are not a militant race by nature. They shy away from battle except
when the sahuagin attack, and then they only defend themselves and retreat into
the depths where their foes can’t follow. This trend begins to change. As the
tidecallers come to rally their people, some triton men and women take up arms.
They call these generals “sub-mariners” and build for them armor of shells and
hardened glass. They swim in formation, wielding pikes and harpoons and attack
the crews of ships that wander too far from port. Watch for their pennants of
kelp on the horizon and the conch-cry of a call to battle and keep, if you can,
your boats near shore. /Instinct/: To wage war
    - Lead tritons to battle
    - Pull them beneath the waves
** Triton Noble Group, Organized, Intelligent
*Trident (d8 damage) 6 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Near, Far*
*Special Qualities:* Aquatic
The triton ruling houses were chosen, they say, at the dawn of time. Granted
lordship over all the races of the sea by some now-forgotten god. These
bloodlines continue, passing rulership from father to daughter and mother to son
through the ages. Each is allowed to rule their city in whatever way they
choose—some alone or with their spouses, others in council of brothers and
sisters. In ages past, they were known for their sagacity and bloodlines of
even-temper were respected above all else. The tidecallers prophecy is changing
that: nobles are expected to be strong, not wise. The nobles have begun to
respond, and it is feared by some that the ancient blood is changing forever. It
may be too late to turn back. Time and tide wait for none. /Instinct/: To lead
    - Stir tritons to war
    - Call reinforcements
* Twisted Experiments
** Bulette Solitary, Huge, Construct
*Bite (d10+5 damage, 3 piercing) 20 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
A seasoned caravan guard learns to listen for the calls of a scout or sentry
with a keen ear. A few extra seconds after the alarm is raised can mean life or
death. Different cries mean different responses, too—a call of “orcs!” means
draw your sword and steady for blood but a call of “bandits!” says you might be
able to bargain. One alarm from the scouts that always, always means it’s time
to pack up, whip your horse and run for the hills? “LAND SHARK!” /Instinct/: To
devour
    - Drag prey into rough tunnels
    - Burst from the earth
    - Swallow whole
** Chimera Solitary, Large, Construct
*Bite (d10+1 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Reach*
Well-known and categorized, the chimera is a perfected creature. From the
codices of the Mage’s Guild to the famous pages of Cullaina’s Creature
Compendium, there’s no confusion about what chimera means. Two parts lioness,
one part serpent, head of a she-goat, and all the vicious magic one can muster.
The actual ritual might vary, as might a detail or two—more creative sorcerers
switch the flame breath for acid, perhaps. Used as a guardian, an assassin or
merely an instrument of chaos unchained, it matters little. The chimera is the
worst sort of abomination: an intentional affront to all natural life.
/Instinct/: To do as commanded
    - Belch forth flame
    - Run them over
    - Poison them
** Derro Horde, Devious, Intelligent, Organized
*Pickaxe (d6 damage) 3 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Telepathy
It’s typical to think that all the malignant arcane monsters made in this world
are birthed by wizards, sorcerers, and their ilk. That the colleges and towers
of Dungeon World are womb to every bleak experiment. There are mistakes made in
the depths of the earth, too. These ones, the derro, are the mistakes of a
long-forgotten dwarven alchemist. The derro don’t forget, though. Twisted and
hateful, the derro can be spotted by their swollen skulls, brain-matter grown
too large. They do not speak except in thoughts to one another and plot in the
silent dark to extract sweetest revenge—that of the created on the creator.
/Instinct/: To replace dwarves
    - Fill a mind with foreign thoughts
    - Take control of a beast’s mind
** Digester Solitary, Large, Construct
*Acid (d10+1 damage ignores armor) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Digest acid secretion
It’s okay, magical experimentation is a messy science. For every beautiful
pegasus there’s a half-done creature that wasn’t quite right. We understand. The
goblin-elephant you thought was such a great idea. The Gelatinous Drake. Just
examples. No judgement here. Anyway, we’ve got something for that. We call it
the Digester. Yes, just like it sounds. Strange looking, I know, and the smell
isn’t the best, but this thing—it’ll eat magic like Svenloff the Stout drinks
ale. Next time one of these unfortunate accidents occurs, just point the
Digester at it and all your troubles drain away. Just keep an eye on it. Damn
thing ate my wand last week. /Instinct/: To digest
    - Eat away at something
    - Draw sustenance
** Ethereal Filcher Solitary, Devious, Planar
*Stolen dagger (w[2d8] damage) 12 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
Things go missing. A sock, a silver spoon, your dead mother’s bones. We blame
the maid, or bad luck, or just a moment of stupid forgetfulness and we move on.
We never get to see the real cause of these problems. The spidery thing with
human hands and eyes as blue as the deep Ethereal plane from whence the creature
comes. We never see the nest it makes of astral silver webbing and stolen
objects arranged in some mad pattern. We never watch it assemble its collection
of halfling finger-bones, stolen from the hands of the sleeping. We’re lucky,
that way. /Instinct/: To steal
    - Take something important to its planar lair
    - Retreat to the Ethereal plane
    - Use an item from its lair
** Ettin Solitary, Large, Construct
*Club (d10+3 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Two heads
What could possibly be better than an idiotic angry hill giant? One with two
heads. Fantastic idea, really. Grade A stuff. /Instinct/: To smash
    - Attack two enemies at once
    - Defend its creator
** Girallon Solitary, Huge
*Rending hands (d10+5 damage) 20 HP 1 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Many arms
The pounding of the jungle drums calls to it. The slab of meat on the
sacrificial stone to lure in the great ape. Girallon, they call it—a name from
the long-forgotten tongue of the kings who bred the beast. Taller than a
building, some say. Cloaked in ivory fur with tusks as long as scimitars. Four
arms? Six? The rumors are hard to verify. Every year it is the same: some
explorer visits the jungle villages seeking the ape and returns, never quite the
same, never with a trophy. The pounding of the drums goes on. /Instinct/: To
rule
    - Answer the call of sacrifice
    - Drive them from the jungle
    - Throw someone
** Iron Golem Group, Large, Construct
*Metal fists (d8+5 damage) 10 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Metal
A staple of the enchanter’s art. Every golemist and mechano-thaumaturge in the
kingdoms knows this. Iron is a misnomer, though. These guardians are crafted of
any metal, really: steel, copper, or even gold, in some small cases. As much an
art as a science, the crafting of a fine golem is as respected in the Kingdoms
as a bridge newly built or a castle erected in the mountains. Unceasing
watchdog, stalwart defender, the iron golem lives to serve, following its orders
eternally. Any enchanter worth his salt can craft one, if he can afford the
materials. If not… /Instinct/: To serve
    - Follow orders implacably
    - Use a special tool or adaptation, built-in
** Flesh Golem Horde
*Miscellaneous Claws and Teeth (d6+2 damage) 3 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Many body parts
Stolen bits and pieces in the night. Graveyards stealthily uprooted and maybe
tonight an arm, a leg, another head (the last one came apart too soon). Even the
humblest hedge-enchanter can make do with what he can and, with a little
creativity, well—it’s not only the college that can make life, hmm? We’ll show
them. /Instinct/: To live
    - Follow orders
    - Detach a body part
** Kraken Solitary, Huge
*Giant tentacles (d10+5 damage) 20 HP 2 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Aquatic
”A cephalo-what? No, boy. Not “a kraken” but “the kraken.” I don’t know what
nonsense they taught you at that school you say you’re from, but here, we know
to respect the Hungerer. Right, that’s what we call it, The Hungerer in the Deep
to be more proper. Ain’t no god, though we’ve got those, too. It’s a squid! A
mighty squid with tentacles thicker ‘round than a barrel and eyes the size of
the full moon. Smart, too, the Hungerer. Knows just when to strike—when you’re
all too drunk or too tired or run out of clean water, that’s when he gets you.
No, I ain’t ever seen him. I’m alive, aren’t I?” /Instinct/: To rule the ocean
    - Drag a person or ship to a watery grave
    - Wrap them in tentacles
** Manticore Solitary, Large, Construct
*Stinger (d10+1 damage, 1 piercing) 16 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
If the chimera is the first step down a dark path, the manticore is a door that
can’t be closed once it’s been opened. A lion, a scorpion, the wings of a drake.
All difficult to obtain but not impossible and just animals, anyway. The last
component, the hissing hateful face of the beast, is the ingredient that makes a
manticore so cruel. Young or old, man or woman, it matters not but that they are
human, living and breathing, married to the creature with twisted magic. All
sense of who they are is lost, and maybe that’s a blessing, but the beast is
born from human suffering. No wonder, then, that they’re all so eager to kill.
/Instinct/: To kill
    - Poison them
    - Rip something apart
** Owlbear Solitary, Construct
*Claws (d10 damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
Body of a bear. Feathers of an owl. Beak, claws, and excellent night vision.
What’s not to love? /Instinct/: To hunt
    - Strike from darkness
** Pegasus Group, Construct
*Sharp hooves (d8 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
Don’t go thinking that every creature not natural-born is a horrible
abomination. Don’t imagine for a second that they’re all tentacles and screaming
and blood or whatever. Take this noble beast, for example. Lovely thing, isn’t
it? A fine white horse with the wings of a swan. Don’t look like it ought to be
able to fly, but it does. The elves work miracles, in their own way. They breed
true—that’s the purity of elf-magic at work. Hatching from little crystal eggs
and bonded with their riders for life. There’s still some beauty in the world,
mark my words. /Instinct/: To carry aloft
    - Carry a rider into the air
    - Give their rider an advantage
** Rust Monster Group, Construct
*Corrosive touch (d8 damage, ignores armor) 6 HP 3 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Corrosive touch
A very distinctive-looking creature. Something like a reddish cricket, I think.
Long crickety legs, anyhow. Blind, too, as I understand it—they feel their way
around with those long moth-looking tendrils. Feed that way, too. Sift through
piles of metal for the choicest bits. That’s what they eat, don’t matter the
type, neither. Their merest touch turns it all to rusted flakes. Magic lasts
longer but under the scrutiny of a rust monster, it’s a foregone conclusion.
Only the gods know where they came from, but they’re a curse if you value your
belongings. /Instinct/: To decay
    - Turn metal to rust
    - Gain strength from consuming metal
** Xorn Solitary, Large, Construct
*Maw (d10 damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
Dwarf-made elemental garbage muncher. Shaped like a trash bin with a radius of
arms to feed excess rock and stone into its gaping maw. They eat stone and
excrete light and heat. Perfect for operating a mine or digging out a quarry.
Once one gets lost in the sewers below a city, though, or in the foundation of a
castle? You’re in deep trouble. They’ll eat and eat until you’ve got nothing
left but to collapse the place down on it and move somewhere else. Ask Burrin,
Son of Fjornnvald, exile from his clan. I bet he could tell you a story about a
xorn. /Instinct/: To eat
    - Consume stone
    - Give off a burst of light and heat
* Lower Depths
** Aboleth Group, Huge, Intelligent
*Tentacle (d10+3 damage) 18 HP 0 Armor*
*Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Telepathy
Deep below the surface of the world, in freshwater seas untouched by the sun,
dwell the aboleth. Fish the size of whales, with strange growths of gelatinous
feelers used to probe the lightless shores. They’re served by slaves: blind
albino victims of any race unfortunate enough to stumble on them, drained of
thought and life by the powers of the aboleth’s alien mind. In the depths they
plot against each other, fishy cultists building and digging upward towards the
surface until someday, they’ll breach it. For now, they sleep and dream and
guide their pallid minions to do their bidding. /Instinct/: To command
    - Invade a mind
    - Turn minions on them
    - Put a plan in motion
** Apocalypse Dragon Solitary, Huge, Magical, Divine
*Bite (b[2d12]+9 damage, 4 piercing) 26 HP 5 Armor*
*Reach, Forceful, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Inch-thick metal hide, Supernatural knowledge, Wings
The end of all things shall be a burning—of tree and earth and of the air
itself. It shall come upon the plains and mountains not from beyond this world
but from within it. Birthed from the womb of deepest earth shall come the Dragon
that Will End the World. In its passing all will become ash and bile and the
Dungeon World a dying thing will drift through planar space devoid of life. They
say to worship the Apocalypse Dragon is to invite madness. They say to love it
is to know oblivion. The awakening is coming. /Instinct/: To end the world
    - Set a disaster in motion
    - Breathe forth the elements
    - Act with perfect foresight
** Chaos Spawn Solitary, Amorphous
*Chaotic touch (d10 damage) 19 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Chaos form
Driven from the city, a cultist finds sanctuary in towns and villages.
Discovered there, he flees to the hills and scratches his devotion on the cave
walls. Found out again, he is chased with knife and torch into the depths,
crawling deeper and deeper until, in the deepest places, he loses his way.
First, he forgets his name. Then he forgets his shape. His chaos gods, most
beloved, bless him with a new one. /Instinct/: To undermine the established
order
    - Rewrite reality
    - Unleash chaos from containment
** Chuul Group, Large, Cautious
*Claws (d8+1 damage, 3 piercing) 10 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Amphibious
Your worst seafood nightmare come to life. A vicious sort of half-man
half-crawdad, cursed with primal intelligence and blessed with a pair of
razor-sharp claws. Strange things lurk in the stinking pools in caverns best
forgotten and the chuul is one of them. If you spot one, your best hope is a
heavy mace to crack its shell and maybe a little garlic butter. Mmmm.
/Instinct/: To split
    - Split something in two with mighty claws
    - Retreat into water
** Deep Elf Assassin Group, Intelligent, Organized
*Poisoned blade (d8 damage, 1 piercing) 6 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
It was not so simple a thing as a war over religion or territory. No
disagreement of queens led to the great sundering of the elves. It was sadness.
It was the very diminishing of the world by the lesser races. The glory of all
the elves had built was cracking and turning to glass. Some, then, chose to
separate themselves from the world; wracked with tears they turned their backs
on men and dwarves. There were others, though, that were overcome with something
new. A feeling no elf had felt before. Spite. Hatred filled these elves and
twisted them and they turned on their weaker cousins. Some still remain after
the great exodus below. Some hide amongst us with spider-poisoned blades, meting
out that strangest of punishments: elven vengeance. /Instinct/: To spite the
surface races
    - Poison them
    - Unleash an ancient spell
    - Call reinforcements
** Deep Elf Swordmaster Group, Intelligent, Organized
*Barbed blade (b[2d8]+2 damage, 1 piercing) 6 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
The deep elves lost the sweetness and gentle peace of their bright cousins ages
ago, but they did not abandon grace. They move with a swiftness and beauty that
would bring a tear to any warrior’s eye. In the dark, they’ve practiced. A
cruelty has infested their swordsmanship—a wickedness comes to the fore. Barbed
blades and whips replace the shining pennant-spears of elven battles on the
surface. The swordmasters of the deep elf clans do not merely seek to kill, but
to punish with every stroke of their blades. Wickedness and pain are their
currency. /Instinct/: To punish unbelievers
    - Inflict pain beyond measure
    - Use the dark to advantage
** Deep Elf Priest Solitary, Divine, Intelligent, Organized
*Smite (d10+2 damage) 14 HP 0 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Divine connection
The spirits of the trees and the lady sunlight are far, far from home in the
depths where the deep elves dwell. New gods were found there, waiting for their
children to come home. Gods of the spiders, the fungal forests, and things that
whisper in the forbidden caves. The deep elves, ever attuned to the world around
them, listened with hateful intent to their new gods and found a new source of
power. Hate calls to hate and grim alliances were made. Even among these
spiteful ranks, piety finds a way to express itself. /Instinct/: To pass on
divine vengeance
    - Weave spells of hatred and malice
    - Rally the deep elves
    - Pass on divine knowledge
** Dragon Solitary, Huge, Terrifying, Cautious, Hoarder
*Bite (b[2d12]+5 damage, 4 piercing) 16 HP 5 Armor*
*Reach, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Elemental blood, Wings
They are the greatest and most terrible things this world will ever have to
offer. /Instinct/: To rule
    - Bend an element to its will
    - Demand tribute
    - Act with disdain
** Gray Render Solitary, Large
*Rending claws (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Forceful*
On its own, the render is a force of utter destruction. Huge and leathery, with
a maw of unbreakable teeth and claws to match, the render seems to enjoy little
more than tearing things apart. Stone, flesh, or steel, it matters little.
However, the gray render is so rarely found alone. They bond with other
creatures. Some at birth, others as fully-grown creatures, and a gray render
will follow their bonded master wherever they go, bringing them offerings of
meat and protecting them while they sleep. Finding an un-bonded render means
certain riches, if you survive to sell it. /Instinct/: To serve
    - Tear something apart
** Magmin Horde, Intelligent, Organized, Hoarder
*Flaming hammer (d6+2 damage) 7 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Fiery blood
Dwarf-shaped and industrious, the magmin are among the deepest-dwellers of
Dungeon World. Found in cities of brass and obsidian built nearest the molten
core of the planet, the magmin live a life devoted to craft—especially that of
fire and magical items related to it. Surly and strange, they do not often deign
to speak to petitioners who appear at their gates, even those who have somehow
found a way to survive the hellish heat. Even so, they respect little more than
a finely made item and to learn to forge from a magmin craftsman means unlocking
secrets unknown to surface blacksmiths. Like so much else, visiting the magmin
is a game of risk and reward. /Instinct/: To craft
    - Offer a trade or deal
    - Strike with fire or magic
    - Provide just the right item, at a price
** Minotaur Solitary, Large
*Axe (d10+1 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Unerring sense of direction
“Head of a man, body of a bull. No, wait, I’ve got that backwards. It’s the
bull’s head and the man’s body. Hooves sometimes? Is that right? I remember the
old king said something about a maze? Blast! You know I can’t think under this
kind of pressure. What was that? Oh gods, I think it’s coming…” /Instinct/: To
contain
    - Confuse them
    - Make them lost
** Naga Solitary, Intelligent, Organized, Hoarder, Magical
*Bite (d10 damage) 12 HP 2 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
Ambitious and territorial above nearly all else, the naga are very rarely found
without a well-formed and insidious cult of followers. You’ll see it in many
mountain towns—a snake sigil scrawled on a tavern wall or a local church burned
to the ground. People going missing in the mines. Men and women wearing the mark
of the serpent. At the core of it all lies a naga: an old race now fallen into
obscurity, still preening with the head of a man over its coiled, serpent body.
Variations of these creatures exist depending on their bloodline and original
purpose, but they are all master manipulators and magical forces to be reckoned
with. /Instinct/: To lead
    - Send a follower to their death
    - Use old magic
    - Offer a deal or bargain
** Salamander Horde, Large, Intelligent, Organized, Planar
*Flaming spear (b[2d6]+3 damage) 7 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Near*
*Special Qualities:* Burrowing
“The excavation uncovered what the reports called a basalt gate. Black stone
carved with molten runes. When they dug it up, the magi declared it inert but
further evidence indicates that was an incorrect claim. The entire team went
missing. When we arrived, the gate was glowing. Its light filled the whole
cavern. We could see from the entrance that the area had become full of these
creatures—like men with red and orange skin, tall as an ogre but with a snake’s
tail where their legs ought to be. They were clothed, too—some had black glass
armor. They spoke to each other in a tongue that sounded like grease in a fire.
I wanted to leave but the sergeant wouldn’t listen. You’ve already read what
happened next, sir. I know I’m the only one that got back, but what I said is
true. The gate is open, now. This is just the beginning!” /Instinct/: To consume
in flame
    - Summon elemental fire
    - Melt away deception
* Planar Powers
** Angel Solitary, Terrifying, Divine, Intelligent, Organized
*Sword of Flames (b[2d10]+4 damage, ignores armor) 18 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Forceful*
*Special Qualities:* Wings
“So was it written that the heavens opened up to Avra’hal and did an angel from
the clouds emerge to speak unto her and so did it appear to her as her firstborn
daughter—beautiful, of ebon skin and golden eyes—and did Avra’hal weep to see
it. ‘Be not afraid,’ it commanded her. ‘Go to the villages I have shown you in
your dreams and unto them show the word I have written on your soul.’ Avra’hal
wept and wept and did agree to do this and did take up her sword and tome and
did into the villages go, a great thirst for blood on her lips for the word the
angel wrote upon the soul of Avra’hal was ‘kill’.” /Instinct/: To share divine
will
    - Deliver visions and prophecy
    - Stir mortals to action
    - Expose sin and injustice
** Barbed Devil Solitary, Large, Planar, Terrifying
*Spines (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach, Messy*
*Special Qualities:* Spines
There are a thousand forms of devil, maybe more. Some common and some unique.
Each time the Inquisitors discover a new one they write it into the Tormentors
Codex and the knowledge is shared among the abbeys in the hope that atrocities
of that particular sort won’t find their way into the world again. The barbed
devil has long been known to the brothers and sisters of the Inquisition. It
appears only at a site of great violence or when called by a wayward summoner.
Covered in sharp quills, this particular demon revels in the spilling of blood,
preferably by impaling victims piecemeal or in whole upon its thorns and letting
them die there. Cruel but not particularly effective beyond slaughter. A low
inquisitorial priority. /Instinct/: To rend flesh and spill blood
    - Impale someone
    - Kill indiscriminately
** Chain Devil Solitary, Planar
*Crush (d10 damage, ignores armor) 12 HP 3 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
Do you think the phrase “drag him to hell” means nothing? It is unfortunately
literal, in the case of the chain devil. Appearing differently to each victim,
this summoned creature has but a single purpose: to wrap its victim up in
binding coils and take it away to a place of torment. Sometimes it will come as
a man-shaped mass of rusting iron, hooks and coils of mismatched links. Other
times, a roiling tangle of rope or kelp or twisted bloody bedsheets. The results
are always the same. /Instinct/: To capture
    - Take a captive
    - Return to whence it came
    - Torture with glee
** Concept Elemental Solitary, Devious, Planar, Amorphous
*Special Qualities:* Ideal form
The planes are not as literal as our world. Clothed in the elemental chaos are
places of stranger stuff than air and water. Here, rivers of time crash upon
shores of crystal fear. Bleak storms of nightmare roil and churn in a
laughter-bright sky. Sometimes, the spirits of these places can be lured into
our world, though they are infinitely more unpredictable and strange than mere
fire or earth might be. Easier to make mistakes, too—one might try calling up a
wealth elemental and be surprised to find a murder elemental instead.
/Instinct/: To perfect its concept
    - Demonstrate its concept in its purest form
** Corrupter Solitary, Devious, Planar, Hoarder
*Secret dagger (w[2d8] damage) 12 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
“Surely, my good man, you must know why I am here. Must know who I am. You said
the words. You spilled the blood and followed the instructions almost to the
letter. Your pronunciation was a bit off but that’s to be expected. I’ve come to
give you what you’ve always wanted, friend. Glory, love, money? Paltry things
when you’ve the vaults of hell to plumb. Don’t look so shocked, you knew what
this was. You have but one thing we desire. Promise it to us, and the world
shall be yours for the taking. Trust me.” /Instinct/: To bargain
    - Offer a deal with horrible consequences
    - Plumb the vaults of hell for a bargaining chip
    - Make a show of power
** Djinn Group, Large, Magical
*Flame (d8+1 damage, ignores armor) 14 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Made of flame
“Stop rubbing that lamp, you idiot. I do not care what you have read, it will
not grant you wishes. I brought you here to show you something real, something
true. See this mural? It shows the ancient city. The true city that came before.
They called it Majilis and it was made of brass by the spirits. They had golem
servants and human lovers and, in that day, it was said you could trade them a
year of your life for a favor. We are not here to gather treasure this night,
fool, we are here to learn. The djinn still sometimes come to these places, and
you must understand their history if you are to know how to behave. They are
powerful and wicked and proud and you must know them if you hope to survive a
summoning. Now, bring the lamp here and we will light it, it grows dark and
these ruins are dangerous at night.” /Instinct/: To burn eternally
    - Grant power for a price
    - Summon the forces of the City of Brass
** Hell Hound Group, Planar, Organized
*Fiery Bite (d8 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Hide of shadow
When one reneges on a deal, does not the debtor come for payment? Does the owed
party not send someone to collect what is due? So too with the Powers Below.
They only want what is theirs. A howling pack of shadows, flame and jagged bone,
driven by the hunting horn. They will not cease, they cannot be evaded.
/Instinct/: To pursue
    - Follow despite all obstacles
    - Spew fire
    - Summon the forces of hell on their target
** Imp Horde, Planar, Intelligent, Organized
*Flame gout (d6 damage, ignores armor) 7 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Near, Far*
These tiny observer-demons often act as a first-time binding subject by neophyte
warlocks. They can be found infesting arcane cabals, drinking potions when no
one watches, and chasing pets and servants with tiny pitchforks. A caricature of
true demonhood, these little creatures are, thankfully, not too difficult to
bind or extinguish. /Instinct/: To harass
    - Send information back to hell
    - Cause mischief
** Inevitable Group, Large, Magical, Cautious, Amorphous, Planar
*Hammer (d10+1 damage) 21 HP 5 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Made of Order
All things come to an end. Reality bleeds from the cut of entropy’s knife. At
the edge of time itself stand the inevitable. Massive, powerful and seemingly
carved from star-stuff themselves, the inevitable intervene only where magic or
calamity have undone the skein of fate. Where the arrogant and powerful boil the
substance of destiny away and seek to undermine the very laws of reality, the
inevitable arrive to guide things back to the proper order. Unshakable,
seemingly immune to mortal harm and utterly enigmatic, it is said that the
Inevitable are all that will remain when time’s long thread has run out.
/Instinct/: To preserve order
    - End a spell or effect
    - Enforce a law of nature or man
    - Give a glimpse of destiny
** Larvae Horde, Devious, Planar, Intelligent
*Slime (w[2d4] damage) 10 HP 0 Armor*
*Close*
Those who have seen visions of the Planes Below, and survived with their sanity
intact, speak of masses of these writhing wretches. Maggots with the faces of
men and women, crying out for salvation in a nest of flames. Sometimes, they can
be goaded out through a rip in the planar caul and emerge, wriggling and in
torment, into our world. Once here, they spread misery and sickness during their
mayfly lives before expiring into a slurry of gore. All in all, an enticement to
do good deeds in life. /Instinct/: To suffer
    - Fill them with despair
    - Beg for mercy
    - Draw evil attention
** Nightmare Horde, Large, Magical, Terrifying, Planar
*Trample (d6+1 damage) 7 HP 4 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
*Special Qualities:* Flame and shadow
The herd came from a pact made in the days when folk still inhabited the Blasted
Steppes. Horselords, they were, who travelled those lands. Born in the saddle,
it was said. One of theirs, in a bid to dominate his peers, made a black pact
with some fell power and traded away his finest horses. He had some power,
sure—but what’s a thousand year dynasty when a life is so short? Now the fiends
of the pit ride on the finest horses ever seen. Coats of shining oil and manes
of tormented flame: these are steeds of hell’s cavalry. /Instinct/: To ride
rampant
    - Sheath a rider in hellish flame
    - Drive them away
** Quasit Horde, Planar
*Hellish weaponry (d6 damage) 7 HP 2 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Adaptable form
An imp with some ambition. A quasit is a kind of foot soldier in the demon
realm. A commoner, armed with fangs or claws or wings or some other thing to
give it just a little edge over its hellish peers. Commonly bound by warlocks to
carry heavy loads or build bridges or guard their twisted towers, a quasit can
take on many forms, none of them pleasant. /Instinct/: To serve
    - Attack with abandon
    - Inflict pain
** The Tarrasque Solitary, Huge, Planar
*Special Qualities:* Impervious
The Tarrasque. Legendary unstoppable juggernaut—eater of cities and swallower of
ships, horses, and knights. A creature unseen in an age but about whom all kinds
of stories are told. One thread of truth weaves through these stories. It cannot
be killed. No blade can pierce its stony shell nor spell penetrate the shield it
somehow bears. Stories say, though, that the will of one pure soul can send it
to slumber, though what that means and, by the gods, where such a thing might be
found, pray we do not ever need to learn. It slumbers. Somewhere in the
periphery of the planar edge, it sleeps for now. /Instinct/: To consume
    - Swallow a person, group, or place whole
    - Release a remnant of a long-eaten place from its gullet
** Word Demon Solitary, Planar, Magical
All of mortal magic is just words. Spells are prayers, rote formula, runes cast,
or songs sung. Letters, words, sentences, and syntax strung together in a
language that the whole world itself might understand. By way of words we can
make our fellows cry or exult, can paint pictures and whisper desire to the
gods. No little wonder, then, that in all that power is intent. That every word
we utter, if repeated and meaning or emotion given to it, can spark a kind of
unintentional summoning. Word daemons are called by accident, appear at random
and are often short-lived, but come to attend a particular word. Capricious,
unpredictable and dangerous, yes—but possibly useful, depending on the word.
/Instinct/: To further their word
    - Cast a spell related to their word
    - Bring their word into abundance
* Folk of the Realm
** Acolyte
“Can’t all be the High Priest, they said. Can’t all wield the White Spire, they
said. Scrub the floor, they told me. The Cthonic Overgod don’t want a messy
floor, do he? They said it’d be enlightenment and magic. Feh. It’s bruised knees
and dishpan hands. If only I’d been a cleric, instead.” /Instinct/: To serve
dutifully
    - Follow dogma
    - Offer eternal reward for mortal deeds
** Adventurer Horde, Intelligent
*Sword (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
*Special Qualities:* Endless enthusiasm
“Scum of the earth, they are. A troupe of armored men and women come sauntering
into town, brandishing what, for all intents and purposes, is enough magical and
mundane power to level the whole place. Bringing with them bags and bags of
loot, still dripping blood from whatever poor sod they had to kill to get it. An
economical fiasco waiting to happen, if you ask me. The whole system becomes
completely uprooted. Dangerous, unpredictable murder-hobos. Oh, wait, you’re an
adventurer? I take it all back.” /Instinct/: To adventure or die trying
    - Go on a fool’s errand
    - Act impulsively
    - Share tales of past exploits
** Bandit Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Dirk (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
Desperation is the watchword of banditry. When times are tough, what else is
there to do but scavenge a weapon and take up with a clan of nasty men and
women? Highway robbery, poaching, scams and cons and murder most foul but we’ve
all got to eat so who can blame them? Then again, there’s evil in the hearts of
some and who’s to say that desperation isn’t a need to sate one’s baser lusts?
Anyway—it’s this or starve, sometimes. /Instinct/: To rob
    - Steal something
    - Demand tribute
** Bandit King Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
*Trusty knife (b[2d10] damage) 12 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
Better to rule in hell than serve in heaven. /Instinct/: To lead
    - Make a demand
    - Extort
    - Topple power
** Fool
There’s not but one person in all the King’s court allowed to speak the truth.
The real, straight-and-honest truth about anything. The fool couches it all in
bells and prancing and chalky face-paint, but who else gets to tell the King
what’s what? You can trust a fool, they say, especially when he’s made you
red-faced and you’d just as soon drown him in a cesspit. /Instinct/: To mock
    - Expose injustice
    - Play a trick
** Guardsman Group, Intelligent, Organized
*Spear (d8 damage) 6 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
Noble protector or merely drunken lout, it often makes no difference to these
sorts. Falling shy of a noble knight, the proud town guard is an ancient
profession nonetheless. These folks of the constabulary often dress in the
colors of their lord (when you can see it under the mud) and, depending on the
richness of that lord, might even have a decent weapon and some armor that fits.
Those are the lucky ones. Even so, someone has to be there to keep an eye on the
gate when the Black Riders have been spotted in the woods. Too many of us owe
our lives to these souls—remember that the next time one is drunkenly insulting
your mother, hmm? /Instinct/: To do as ordered
    - Uphold the law
    - Make a profit
** Halfling Thief Solitary, Small, Intelligent, Stealthy, Devious
*Dagger (w[2d8] damage) 12 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
It would be foolish, now, to draw conclusions about folks just because they
happen to be good at one thing or another. Then again, a spade’s a spade, isn’t
it. Or maybe just the goodly, soft-and-sweet type of Halfling have the mind to
stay in their grassy-hill homes and aren’t the type you find in the slums and
taverns of the mannish world. Perhaps they’re there to cut your purse for
calling them “halfling” in the first place. Not all take so kindly to the title.
Or they’re playing a game, pretending to be a child in need of alms—and your
arrogant eyes can’t even see the difference until too late. Well, it matters
little. They’re gone with your coin before you even realize you deserved it.
/Instinct/: To live a life of stolen luxury
    - Steal
    - Put on the appearance of friendship
** Hedge Wizard Magical
Not all those who wield the arcane arts are adventuring wizards. Nor
necromancers in mausoleums or sorcerers of ancient bloodline. Some are just old
men and women, smart enough to have discovered a trick or two. It might make
them a bit batty to come by that knowledge, but if you’ve a curse to break or a
love to prove, might be that a hedge wizard will help you, if you can find his
rotten hut in the swamp and pay the price he asks. /Instinct/: To learn
    - Cast almost the right spell (for a price)
    - Make deals beyond their ken
** High Priest
Respected by all who gaze upon them, the high priests and abbesses of Dungeon
World are treated with a sort of reverence. Whether they pay homage to
Ur-thuu-hak, God of Swords, or whisper quiet prayers to Namiah, precious
daughter of peace, they know a thing or two that you and I won’t ever know. The
gods speak to them as a hawker-of-wares might speak to us in the marketplace.
For this, for the bearing-of-secrets and the knowing-of-things, we give them a
wide berth as they pass in their shining robes. /Instinct/: To lead
    - Set down divine law
    - Reveal divine secrets
    - Commission divine undertakings
** Hunter Group, Intelligent
*Ragged bow (d6 damage) 6 HP 1 Armor*
*Near, Far*
The wilds are home to more than just beasts of horn and scale. There are men and
women out there, too—those who smell blood on the wind and stalk the plains in
the skins of their prey. Whether with a trusty longbow bought on a rare trip
into the city or with a knife of bone and sinew, these folk have more in common
with the things they track and eat than with their own kind. Solemn, somber and
quiet, they find a sort of peace in the wild. /Instinct/: To survive
    - Bring back news from the wilds
    - Slay a beast
** Knight Solitary, Intelligent, Organized, Cautious
*Sword (b[2d10] damage) 12 HP 4 Armor*
*Close*
What youngster doesn’t cling to the rail at the mighty joust, blinded by the sun
on their glittering armor, wishing they could be the one adorned in steel and
riding to please the King and Queen? What peasant youth with naught but a loaf
of bread and a lame sow doesn’t wish to trade it all in for the lance and the
bright pennant? A knight is many things—a holy warrior, a sworn sword, a villain
sometimes, too, but a knight cannot help but be a symbol to all who see her. A
knight means something. /Instinct/: To live by a code
    - Make a moral stand
    - Lead soldiers into battle
** Merchant
“Ten foot poles. Get your ten foot poles, here. Torches, bright and hot. Mules,
too—stubborn but immaculately bred. Need a linen sack, do you? Right over here!
Come and get your ten foot poles!” /Instinct/: To profit
    - Propose a business venture
    - Offer a “deal”
** Noble
Are they granted their place by the gods, perhaps? Is that why they’re able to
pass their riches and power down by birth? Some trick or enchantment of the
blood, maybe. The peasant bends his knee and scrapes and toils and the noble
wears the finery of his place and, they say, we all have our burdens to bear.
Seems to me that some of us have burdens of stone and some carry their weight in
gold. It’s a tough life. /Instinct/: To rule
    - Issue an order
    - Offer a reward
** Peasant
Covered in muck, downtrodden at the bottom of the great chain of being, we all
stand on the backs of those who grow our food on their farms. Some peasants do
better than others, but none will ever see a coin of gold in their day. They’ll
dream at night of how someday, somehow, they’ll fight a dragon and save a
princess. Don’t act like you weren’t one before you lost what little sense you
had, adventurer. /Instinct/: To get by
    - Plead for help
    - Offer a simple reward and gratitude
** Rebel Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Axe (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close*
In the countryside they’d be called outlaw and driven off or killed. The city,
though, is full of places to hide. Damp basements to pore over maps and to plan
and plot against a corrupt system. Like rats, they gnaw away at order, either to
supplant it anew or just erode the whole thing. The line between change and
chaos is a fine one—some rebels walk that thin line and others just want to see
it all torched. Disguise, a knife in the dark or a thrown torch at the right
moment are all tools of the rebel. The burning brand of anarchy is a common fear
amongst the nobles of Dungeon World. These men and women are why. /Instinct/: To
upset order
    - Die for a cause
    - Inspire others
** Soldier Horde, Intelligent, Organized
*Spear (d6 damage) 3 HP 1 Armor*
*Close, Reach*
For a commoner with a strong arm, sometimes it’s this or be a bandit. It’s wear
the colors and don ill-fitting armor and march into the unknown with a thousand
other scared men and women conscripted to fight the wars of our time. They could
be hiding out in the woods instead, living off poached elk and dodging the
king’s guard. Better to risk one’s life in service to a cause. To bravely toss
one’s lot in with one’s fellows and hope to come out the other side still in one
piece. Besides, the nobles need strong men and women. What is it they say? A
handful of soldiers beats a mouthful of arguments. /Instinct/: To fight
    - March into battle
    - Fight as one
** Spy
Beloved of kings but never truly trusted. Mysterious, secretive and alluring,
the life of a spy is, if you ask a commoner, full of romance and intrigue.
They’re a knife in the dark and a pair of watchful eyes. A spy can be your best
friend, your lover or that old man you see in the market every day. One never
knows. Hells, maybe you’re a spy—they say there’s magic that can turn folks’
minds without them ever knowing it. How can we trust you? /Instinct/: To
infiltrate
    - Report the truth
    - Double cross
** Tinkerer
It’s said that if you see a tinker on the road and you don’t offer him a swig of
ale or some of your food that he’ll leave a curse of bad luck behind. A tinker
is a funny thing. These strange folk often travel the roads between towns with
their oddment carts and favorite mules. With a ratty dog and always a story to
tell. Sometimes the mail, too, if you’re lucky and live in a place where Queen’s
Post won’t go. If you’re kind, maybe they’ll sell you a rose that never wilts or
a clock that chimes with the sound of faerie laughter. Or maybe they’re just
antisocial peddlers. You never know, right? /Instinct/: To create
    - Offer an oddity at a price
    - Spin tales of great danger and reward in far-off lands
* Equipment
The musty tombs and forgotten treasure troves of the world are filled with
useful items. The fighter can find a sharp new sword or the thief might stumble
across a deadly poison. Most items are mundane—not magical or intrinsically
unique in any way. Any item that is magical or one-of-a-kind is not mundane for
the purposes of moves. The fighter’s signature weapon is never mundane.

Each piece of equipment will have a number of tags. These will tell you
something about how the equipment affects the character using it (like +Armor)
or suggest something about the way it is used (like the Range tags). Like
everything else in Dungeon World, these guide the fiction you’re creating in
play. If a weapon is awkward, it might mean that you’re more likely to drop it
when you fail that hack and slash roll.

By no means is this an exhaustive list—feel free to create your own tags.
*** General Equipment Tags

These are general tags that can apply to just about any piece of gear. You’ll
see them on armor, weapons or general adventuring tools.

/Applied/: It’s only useful when carefully applied to a person or to something
they eat or drink.

/Awkward/: It’s unwieldy and tough to use.

/+Bonus/: It modifies your effectiveness in a specified situation. It might be
“+1 forward to spout lore” or “-1 ongoing to hack and slash.”

/n coins/: How much it costs to buy, normally. If the cost includes “-Charisma”
a little negotiation subtracts the haggler’s Charisma score (not modifier) from
the price.

/Dangerous/: It’s easy to get in trouble with it. If you interact with it
without proper precautions the GM may freely invoke the consequences of your
foolish actions.

/Ration/: It’s edible, more or less.

/Requires/: It’s only useful to certain people. If you don’t meet the
requirements it works poorly, if at all.

/Slow/: It takes minutes or more to use.

/Touch/: It’s used by touching it to the target’s skin.

/Two-handed/: It takes two hands to use it effectively.

/n weight/: Count the listed amount against your load. Something with no listed
weight isn’t designed to be carried. 100 coins in standard denominations is 1
weight. The same value in gems or fine art may be lighter or heavier.

/Worn/: To use it, you have to be wearing it.

/n Uses/: It can only be used /n/ times.
** Weapons
Weapons don’t kill monsters, people do. That’s why weapons in Dungeon World
don’t have a listed damage. A weapon is useful primarily for its tags which
describe what the weapon is useful for. A dagger is not useful because it does
more or less damage than some other blade. It’s useful because it’s small and
easy to strike with at close distance. A dagger in the hands of the wizard is
not nearly so dangerous as one in the hands of a skilled fighter.
*** Weapon Tags
Weapons may have tags that are primarily there to help you describe them (like
Rusty or Glowing) but these tags have a specific, mechanical effect.

/n Ammo/: It counts as ammunition for appropriate ranged weapons. The number
indicated does not represent individual arrows or sling stones, but represents
what you have left on hand.

/Forceful/: It can knock someone back a pace, maybe even off their feet.

/+n Damage/: It is particularly harmful to your enemies. When you deal damage,
you add /n/ to it.

/Ignores Armor/: Don’t subtract armor from the damage taken.

/Messy/: It does damage in a particularly destructive way, ripping people and
things apart.

/n Piercing/: It goes right through armor. When you deal damage with /n/
piercing, you subtract /n/ from the enemy’s armor for that attack.

/Precise/: It rewards careful strikes. You use DEX to hack and slash with this
weapon, not STR.

/Reload/: After you attack with it, it takes more than a moment to reset for
another attack.

/Stun/: When you attack with it, it does stun damage instead of normal damage.

/Thrown/: Throw it at someone to hurt them. If you volley with this weapon, you
can’t choose to mark off ammo on a 7–9; once you throw it, it’s gone until you
can recover it.

Weapons have tags to indicate the range at which they are useful. Dungeon World
doesn’t inflict penalties or grant bonuses for “optimal range” or the like, but
if your weapon says Hand and an enemy is ten yards away, a player would have a
hard time justifying using that weapon against him.

/Hand/: It’s useful for attacking something within your reach, no further.

/Close/: It’s useful for attacking something at arm’s reach plus a foot or two.

/Reach/: It’s useful for attacking something that’s several feet away—maybe as
far as ten.

/Near/: It’s useful for attacking if you can see the whites of their eyes.

/Far/: It’s useful for attacking something in shouting distance.
*** Weapon List

The stats below are for typical items. There are, of course, variations. A dull
long sword might be -1 damage instead while a masterwork dagger could be +1
damage. Consider the following to be stats for typical weapons of their type—a
specific weapon could have different tags to represent its features.
**** Ragged Bow near, 15 coins, 2 weight
**** Fine Bow near, far, 60 coins, 2 weight
**** Hunter’s Bow near, far, 100 coins, 1 weight
**** Crossbow near, +1 damage, reload, 35 coins, 3 weight
**** Bundle of Arrows 3 ammo, 1 coin, 1 weight
**** Elven Arrows 4 ammo, 20 coins, 1 weight
**** Club, Shillelagh close, 1 coin, 2 weight
**** Staff close, two-handed, 1 coin, 1 weight
**** Dagger, Shiv, Knife hand, 2 coins, 1 weight
**** Throwing Dagger thrown, near, 1 coin, 0 weight
**** Short Sword, Axe, Warhammer, Mace close, 8 coins, 1 weight
**** Spear reach, thrown, near, 5 coins, 1 weight
**** Long Sword, Battle Axe, Flail close, +1 damage, 15 coins, 2 weight
**** Halberd reach, +1 damage, two-handed, 9 coins, 2 weight
**** Rapier close, precise, 25 coins, 1 weight
**** Dueling Rapier close, 1 piercing, precise, 50 coins, 2 weight
** Armor
Armor is heavy, difficult to wear and is damned uncomfortable. Some classes are
better trained to ignore these drawbacks, but anyone can strap on a suit of
armor and enjoy the benefits it grants.
*** Armor Tags
Armor, like weapons, has tags. Some are purely descriptive but the ones below
have some mechanical effect on the player wearing them

/n Armor/: It protects you from harm and absorbs damage. When you take damage,
subtract your armor from the total. If you have more than one item with /n
Armor/, only the highest value counts.

/+n Armor/: It protects you and stacks with other armor. Add its value to your
total armor.

/Clumsy/: It’s tough to move around with. -1 ongoing while using it. This
penalty is cumulative.
*** Armor List
**** Leather, Chainmail 1 armor, worn, 10 coins, 1 weight
**** Scale Mail 2 armor, worn, clumsy, 50 coins, 3 weight
**** Plate 3 armor, worn, clumsy, 350 coins, 4 weight
**** Shield +1 armor, 15 coins, 2 weight
** Dungeon Gear
**** Adventuring Gear 5 uses, 20 coins, 1 weight
Adventuring gear is a collection of useful mundane items such as chalk, poles,
spikes, ropes, etc. When you rummage through your adventuring gear for some
useful mundane item, you find what you need and mark off a use.
**** Bandages 3 uses, slow, 5 coins, 0 weight
When you have a few minutes to bandage someone else’s wounds, heal them of 4
damage and expend a use.
**** Poultices and Herbs 2 uses, slow, 10 coins, 1 weight
When you carefully treat someone’s wounds with poultices and herbs, heal them of
7 damage and expend a use.
**** Healing Potion 50 coins, 0 weight
When you drink an entire healing potion, heal yourself of 10 damage or remove
one debility, your choice.
**** Keg of Dwarven Stout 10 coins, 4 weight
When you open a keg of dwarven stout and let everyone drink freely, take +1 to
your Carouse roll. If you drink a whole keg yourself, you are very, very drunk.
**** Bag of Books 5 uses, 10 coins, 2 weight
When your bag of books contains just the right book for the subject you’re
spouting lore on, consult the book, mark off a use, and take +1 to your roll.
**** Antitoxin 10 coins, 0 weight
When you drink antitoxin, you’re cured of one poison affecting you.
**** Dungeon Rations Ration, 5 uses, 3 coins, 1 weight
Not tasty, but not bad either.
**** Personal Feast Ration, 1 use, 10 coins, 1 weight
Ostentatious to say the least.
**** Dwarven Hardtack Requires Dwarf, ration, 7 uses, 3 coins, 1 weight
Dwarves say it tastes like home. Everyone else says it tastes like home, if home
is a hog farm, and on fire.
**** Elven Bread Ration, 7 uses, 10 coins, 1 weight
Only the greatest of elf-friends are treated to this rare delicacy.
**** Halfling Pipeleaf 6 uses, 5 coins, 0 weight
When you share halfling pipeleaf with someone, expend two uses and take +1
forward to parley with them.
** Poisons
**** Oil of Tagit Dangerous, applied, 15 coins, 0 weight
The target falls into a light sleep.
**** Bloodweed Dangerous, touch, 12 coins, 0 weight
Until cured, whenever the afflicted rolls damage, they roll an additional d4 and
subtract that result from their normal damage.
**** Goldenroot Dangerous, applied, 20 coins, 0 weight
The target treats the next creature they see as a trusted ally, until proved
otherwise.
**** Serpent’s Tears Dangerous, touch, 10 coins, 0 weight
Anyone dealing damage against the target rolls twice and takes the better
result.
** Services
**** A week’s stay at a peasant inn 14-Charisma coins
**** A week’s stay at a civilized inn 30-Charisma coins
**** A week’s stay at the fanciest inn in town 43-Charisma coins
**** A week’s unskilled mundane labor 10 coins
**** A month’s pay for enlistment in an army 30 coins
**** A custom item from a blacksmith Base Item + 50 coins
**** A night’s “companionship” 20-Charisma coins
**** An evening of song and dance 18-Charisma coins
**** Escort for a day along a bandit-infested road 20 coins
**** Escort for a day along a monster-infested road 54 coins
**** A run-of-the-mill killing 5 coins
**** An assassination 120 coins
**** Healing from a chirurgeon 5 coins
**** A month’s prayers for the departed 1 coin
**** Repairs to a mundane item 25% of the item’s cost
** Meals
**** A hearty meal for one 1 coin
**** A poor meal for a family 1 coin
**** A feast 15 coins per person
** Transport
**** Cart and Donkey, sworn to carry your burdens 50 coins, load 20
**** Horse 75 coins, load 10
**** Warhorse 400 coins, load 12
**** Wagon 150 coins, load 40
**** Barge 50 coins, load 15
**** River boat 150 coins, load 20
**** Merchant ship 5,000 coins, load 200
**** War ship 20,000 coins, load 100
**** Passage on a safe route 1 coin
**** Passage on a tough route 10 coins
**** Passage on a dangerous route 100 coins
** Land and Buildings
**** A hovel 20 coins
**** A cottage 500 coins
**** A house 2,500 coins
**** A mansion 50,000 coins
**** A keep 75,000 coins
**** A castle 250,000 coins
**** A grand castle 1,000,000 coins
**** A month’s upkeep 1% of the cost
** Bribes
**** A peasant dowry 20-Charisma coins
**** “Protection” for a small business 100-Charisma coins
**** A government bribe 50-Charisma coins
**** A compelling bribe 80-Charisma coins
**** An offer you can’t refuse 500-Charisma coins
** Gifts and Finery
**** A peasant gift 1 coin
**** A fine gift 55 coins
**** A noble gift 200 coins
**** A ring or cameo 75 coins
**** Finery 105 coins
**** A fine tapestry 350+ coins
**** A crown fit for a king 5,000 coins
** Hoards
**** A goblin’s stash 2 coins
**** A lizardman’s trinkets 5 coins
**** A “priceless” sword 80 coins
**** An orc warchief’s tribute 250 coins
**** A dragon’s mound of coins and gems 130,000 coins
* Magic Items
There are stranger things in the world than swords and leather. Magic items are
the non-mundane items that have intrinsic power.

Magic items are for you to make for your game. Players can make magic items
through the wizard’s ritual and similar moves. The GM can introduce magic items
in the spoils of battle or the rewards for jobs and quests. This list provides
some ideas, but magic items are ultimately for you to decide.

When making your own magic items keep in mind that these items are /magical/.
Simple modifiers, like+1 damage, are the realm of the mundane—magic items should
provide more interesting bonuses.
** Argo-Thaan, Holy Avenger Close, 2 weight
There are many swords in this world, but there is only one Argo-thaan. It is a
blade of gold, silver and light, revered as a holy relic by all orders and
religions for whom Good rings true. Its touch is a blessing and to many, the
sight of it brings tears of joy.

In the hands of a paladin, it strikes true and strong. A paladin wielding it
increases their damage die to d12 and has access to every paladin move. As well,
Argo-thaan can harm any creature of Evil, regardless of any defenses it may
have. No Evil creature may touch it without suffering agony. In the hands of any
non-paladin, it is merely a sword, heavier and more cumbersome than most—it
gains the awkward tag.

Argo-thaan, while not intelligent, will forever be drawn to a cause of true
Good, like iron to a magnet.
** Arrows of Acheron 1 ammo, 1 weight
Crafted in darkness by a blind fletcher, these arrows can find their target in
even the deepest darkness. An archer may fire them blind, in the dark, with his
eyes bound by heavy cloth and still be assured of a clean shot. If the light of
the sun ever touches the arrows, however, they come apart like shadows and dust.
** Axe of the Conqueror-King Close, 1 weight
It is crafted of shining steel, glowing with a golden light and imbued with
mythical powers of authority. When you bear the axe, you become a beacon of
inspiration to all you lead. Any hirelings in your employ have +1 Loyalty, no
matter the quality of your leadership.
** Barb of the Black Gate 0 weight
A nail or spike, twisted and forever cold, said to have been pried from the
Gates of Death. When hammered into a corpse, it disappears and ensures that
corpse will never be risen again—no magic short of that of Death himself can
reignite the flame of life (natural or otherwise) in the body.
** Bag of Holding 0 weight
A bag of holding is larger on the inside than the outside, it can contain an
infinite number of items, and its weight never increases. When you try to
retrieve an item from a bag of holding, roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+, it’s right there.
✴On a 7-9, choose one:
    - You get the exact item, but it takes a while
    - You get a similar item of the GM’s choice, but it only takes a moment
No matter how many items it contains, a bag of holding is always 0 weight.
** The Burning Wheel 2 weight
An ancient wooden wheel, as might appear on a war-wagon, banded with steel. On a
glance, it appears to be nothing special—many spokes are shattered and the thing
seems mundane. Under the scrutiny of magic or the eyes of an expert, its true
nature is revealed: the Burning Wheel is a gift from the God of Fire and burns
with his authority.

When you hold The Burning Wheel and speak a god’s name, roll+CON. ✴On a 7+, the
god you name takes notice and grants you an audience. An audience with a god is
not without a price: on a 10+, you choose one of your stats and reduce it to the
next lowest modifier (for example, a 14 is +1, so it would be reduced to 12, a
+0). ✴On a 7–9, the GM chooses which stat to reduce.

Once used, the Burning Wheel ignites and burns with brilliant light. It does not
confer any protection from those flames, nor does it provide any bonus to
swimming.
** Captain Bligh’s Cornucopia 1 weight
A brass naval horn, curled and ornate, carved with symbols of the gods of
Plenty. When blown, in addition to sound, the horn spills forth food. Enough to
feed a meal to everyone who hears its sound.
** The Carcosan Spire Reach, Thrown, 3 weight
None know from whence this spear of twisted white coral comes. Those who bear it
too long find their minds full of alien dreams and begin to hear the strange
thoughts of the Others. None are impervious. Used against any “natural” target
(men, goblins, owlbears and the like) the Spire acts as a mere mortal spear. Its
true purpose is to do harm to those things whose strange natures protect them
against mundane weapons. Used thus, the Spire can wound foes otherwise
invulnerable to harm. The wielder will recognize these twisted foes on sight—the
Spire knows its own.
** Cloak of Silent Stars 1 weight
A cape of rich black velvet outside and sparkling with tiny points of light
within, this cloak bends fate, time and reality around it to protect the wearer,
who may defy danger with whatever stat they like. To do this, the wearer invokes
the cloak’s magic and their player describes how the cloak helps “break the
rules.” They can deflect a fireball with CHA by convincing it they deserve to
live or elude a fall by applying the mighty logic of their INT to prove the fall
won’t hurt. The cloak makes it so. It can be used once for each stat before
losing its magic.
** Coin of Remembering 0 weight
What appears, at a glance, to be a simple copper coin is, in truth, an enchanted
coin. Its bearer can, at any time, redeem it to know immediately one fact that
has been forgotten. The coin vanishes thereafter. It does not have to be a thing
forgotten by the bearer, but it cannot be “known.” Interpretation of this
stipulation is left to the gods. If the coin is unsuccessful, it will still
paint an image in the mind’s eye of someone or something that does remember what
was sought.
** Common Scroll 1 use, 0 weight
A common scroll has a spell inscribed on it. The spell must be castable by you
or on your class’s spell list for you to be able to cast it. When you cast a
spell from a scroll, the spell takes effect, simple as that.
** Devilsbane Oil 1 use, 0 weight
A holy oil, created in limited supply by a mute sect of mountain monks whose
order protected humanity from the powers of the Demon Pits in ancient epochs.
Only a few jars remain. When applied to any weapon and used to strike a denizen
of any outer plane, the oil undoes the magic that binds that creature. In some
cases, this will return it to its home. In others, it merely undoes any magic
controlling it. The oil stays on the weapon for a few hours before it dries and
flakes away.

If applied to the edges of a doorway or drawn in a circle, the oil will repel
creatures whose home is any of the outer planes. They cannot pass across it. The
oil lasts for one full day before it soaks in or evaporates.
** Earworm Wax 1 use, 0 weight
A yellowish candle. Seems never to burn out and the light it casts is strange
and weak. Its wax is always cool, too. Drip the wax into the ear of a target and
gain 3 hold. Spend that hold and ask your target a question. They find
themselves telling you the whole truth, despite themselves. The consequences,
after the fact? Those are up to you to deal with.
** The Echo 0 weight
A seemingly empty bottle. Once unstoppered, the whispers of another plane
resound once and fall silent. In the silence, the bearer learns in his soul the
coming of one great danger and how he can avoid it. At any point after you use
the Echo, you can ignore the results of any single die roll—yours or another
player’s—and roll again. Once opened, the Echo is released and gone forever.
** The Epoch Lens 1 weight
An archmage, old and too frail to leave his tower, crafted this intricate and
fragile device of glass and gold to examine the histories and relics he so
loved. Looking at an object through the lens reveals visions of who made it and
where it came from.
** Farsight Stone 1 weight
Swirling clouds fill this smoky orb and those in its presence often hear strange
whispers. In ancient times, it was part of a network of such stones, used to
communicate and surveil across great distances. When you gaze into the stone,
name a location and roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+, you see a clear vision of the location
and can maintain it as long as you concentrate on the orb. ✴On a 7–9, you still
see the vision, but you draw the attention of some other thing (an angel, a
demon, or the holder of another Farsight stone) that uses the stone to surveil
you, as well.
** The Fiasco Codex 0 weight
A thick tome, said to be penned in the blood of poor fools and robber-barons by
some demon prince possessed of dark humor, this tome details tales and stories
of those whose ambition overwhelmed their reason. Reading from this tome teaches
one the value of clear-headedness but leaves a sense of dread behind. When you
read from the Fiasco Codex, Roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+, ask two of the questions below.
✴On a 7–9, ask one.
    - What is my greatest opportunity, right now?
    - Who can I betray to gain an advantage?
    - Who is an ally I should not trust?
The codex gives up its answers only once to each reader and takes 2 to 3 hours
to read.
** Flask of Breath 0 weight
A simple thing, but useful when you need a breath of fresh air. The flask
appears empty but cannot be filled, anything added to it simply spills out. This
is because the flask is eternally full of air. If placed underwater, it will
bubble forever. If pressed to the mouth, one can breathe normally—smoke is no
concern, for example. I’m sure you’ll find all sorts of unusual uses for it.
** Folly Held Aloft, The Wax Wings, A Huge Mistake 1 weight
Who hasn’t always wanted to soar the pretty blue sky? In an attempt to grant the
wishes of land-bound folk, these great magical wings were created. Known by many
names and crafted by as many mages, they commonly take the shape of the wings of
whatever local birds hold affection. Worn by means of a harness or, in some dire
cases, a surgical procedure.

When you take to the air with these magical wings, roll+DEX. ✴On a 10+, your
flight is controlled and you may stay aloft as long as you like. ✴On a 7–9, you
make it aloft but your flight is short or erratic and unpredictable, your
choice. ✴On a 6-, you make it aloft, but the coming-down part and everything
between is up to the GM.
** Immovable Rod 0 weight
A funny metal rod with a button on it. Press the button and the rod just sticks.
It freezes in place—in midair, standing up or lying down. It can’t be moved.
Pull it, push it, try as hard as you like, the rod stays. Maybe it can be
destroyed, maybe it can’t. Push the button again and it’s free—take it along
with you. Might be useful to have such a stubborn thing along.
** Infinite Book 1 weight
This book contains an infinite number of pages in a finite space. With no limit
to the pages, everything that ever was, is, or will be is contained somewhere in
the book. Luckily the index is great.

When you spout lore while consulting the book you gain an extra clause: On a
12+, the GM will give a solution to a problem or situation you’re in.
** Inspectacles 0 weight
Rough-hewn glass in wooden frames. Dinged up and barely held together, they
somehow allow the wearer to see much more than their naked eyes might. When you
discern realities wearing these gifted lenses, you get to bend the rules a
little. On a roll of 10+, ask any three questions you like. They don’t have to
be on the list. As long as sight could give you answers, the GM will tell you
what you want to know.
** The Ku’meh Maneuver 1 weight
A great, leathery tome worn shiny by the hands of a hundred great generals, this
book is often passed from warrior to warrior, from father to son along the great
battle lines that have divided Dungeon World’s past. Anyone reading it may, upon
finishing for the first time, roll+INT. ✴On a 10+, hold 3. ✴On a 7-9, hold 1.
You may spend your hold to advise a companion on some matter of strategic or
tactical significance. This advice allows you to, at any time, regardless of
distance, roll to aid them on any one roll. On a miss, the GM can hold 1 and
spend it to apply -2 to any roll of yours or the poor sap who listened to your
advice.
** Lamented Memento 0 weight
Taking the form of a single lock of bright red hair, bound in a black ribbon and
immune to the ravages of time, the Lamented Memento bears a grim enchantment. In
it are the memories and emotions of a girl who dealt with Death at the Black
Gates so many times that, in the end, they fell in love and she left the world
to be with him for a time. Her memory protects the wielder. If he finds himself
at the Gates, the Memento can be traded for an automatic result of 10+ on the
Last Breath move.
** Lodestone Shield +1 armor, 1 weight
What mixed-up dummy made this? Shields are meant to repel metal, not draw it in!
Emblazoned with a lion rampant, the Lodestone Shield has the power to pull
blades and arrows to it. When you defend against enemies using metal weapons you
can spend one hold, per target, to disarm them. Also, sometimes you’ll find a
handful of loose change stuck to it.
** Map of the Last Patrol 0 weight
An ancient order of brave rangers once patrolled the land, protecting villages
and warning kings and queens of encroaching danger. They’re long gone, now, but
their legacy remains. This map, when marked with the blood of a group of people,
will always show their location—so long as they remain within the bounds of the
map.
** Ned’s Head 1 weight
An old skull, missing its jaw and very much worse-for-wear. The skull remembers
the folly of its former owner—a man with more honor than sense. Once per night,
the owner of the skull can ask “Who has it in for me?” and the skull will give
up one name in a sad, lonely voice. If the owner of the skull is ever killed, it
disappears surreptitiously. No one knows where it might turn up next.
** Nightsider’s Key 0 weight
This key unlocks any door for you, provided you don’t belong where you intend to
go. So long as you do nothing that would alert another to your presence
(remaining unheard, unseen and unnoticed) and takes nothing more than your
memories out with you, the key’s magic will prevent your intrusion from ever
being discovered. It’s like you were never there at all.
** Sacred Herbs 0 weight
The sacred herbs, collected and prepared by an order of lost wizard-monks, can
be found in bundles with two or three uses to them. Kept dry, they last
indefinitely. When smoked in a pipe or consumed in an incense burner and the
thick, blue smoke inhaled, these herbs will grant you strange visions of faraway
places and distant times. If you focus your will on a particular person, place
or thing, the herbs will respond: roll+WIS. ✴On a 10+, the vision is clear and
useful—yielding some valid information. ✴On a 7–9, the vision is about the thing
desired, but is unclear, fraught with metaphor or somehow difficult to
understand. ✴On a miss, the GM will ask you, “What is it you fear most?” You
must answer honestly, of course.
** The Sartar Duck 0 weight
An odd, hand-carved wooden duck. Who would make such a funny thing? While you
bear it, you find yourself an exceptionally gifted storyteller—no matter the
language, you can make yourself and your story clear to any audience. They will
understand your meaning, if not your words.
** Tears of Annalise 0 weight
Cloudy red gemstones the size of a thumbnail, the Tears of Annalise are always
found in pairs. When swallowed by two different people, they bind the swallowers
together—when either feels strong emotions (particularly sadness, loss, fear or
desire) the other feels it, as well. The effects last until one spills the blood
of the other.
** Teleportation Room Slow
James Ninefingers, eccentric genius mage, created these room-sized magical
apparati. A stone chamber etched with runes and scribblings, glowing with a
faint blue light. When you enter and say aloud the name of a location, roll+INT.
✴On a 10+, you arrive exactly where you’d intended. ✴On a 7–9, the GM chooses a
safe location nearby. ✴On a miss, you end up someplace. Maybe it’s nearby? It’s
definitely not safe. Strange things sometimes happen to those who bend time and
space with these devices.
** Timunn’s Armor 1 armor, 1 weight
A stealthy suit of armor, it appears as many things to many people and blends in
with appropriate apparel. The wearer always seems the height of fashion to any
who gaze upon him.
** Titus’ Truthful Tallow 0 weight
A candle of ivory- and copper-colored tallow with a wick of spun silver. When
lit, none upon whom its light falls is able to tell a lie. They may keep silent
or dissemble but when asked a question directly, they can speak naught but
truth.
** Tricksy Rope 1 weight
A rope that listens. Does tricks, too, like a smart and more obedient snake
might. Tell it “Coil” or “Slack” or “Come here, rope” and it will.
** The Sterling Hand 0 weight
Crafted by dwarven whitesmiths, this mirrored-metal hand is deeply scored with
runes of power and rejuvenation. Meant to replace wounded or destroyed limbs
from mining accidents, the Sterling Hand bonds to the wound, old or new, and is
strong and stout. It can be used as a weapon (Near range) and is made of pure
enough silver to harm creatures affected by such.
** Vellius’s Gauntlets 1 weight
Crafted in the name of Vellius the Clumsy, Vellius the Butter-Fingered, Vellius
the Clod, these gloves of simple cloth prevent you from dropping any object you
don’t intend to. You cannot be disarmed and will not fall from any rope or
ladder, for example. This item can get very messy if you have something strong
pulling at your legs while you grip onto something solid.
** Violation Glaive Reach, 2 weight
A legendary blade, said to have been thrust backwards in time from some grim
future, the violation glaive is crafted of strange green iron. The blade strikes
at the mind of those it wounds, as well as the body. When you hack and slash on
a 10+ you have an additional option: you can deal your normal damage, let them
counterattack you, and instill the emotion of your choice (maybe fear,
reverence, or trust).
** Vorpal Sword Close, 3 piercing, 2 weight
Snicker-snack and all that. Sharp as anything, this simple-seeming sword means
to separate one thing from another—the limb from the body or folk from their
lives. When you deal damage with the Vorpal Sword, your enemy must choose
something (an item, an advantage, a limb) and lose it, permanently.
* Advanced Delving
Dungeon World portrays a specific kind of fantasy adventure—one with elves and
dwarves, heroes and villains, and characters struggling for riches and glory in
a dangerous world. Maybe you’ve got an idea for something different—maybe your
Dungeon World is set on a blasted desert planet, peopled by savage cannibals and
ruled by haughty psychics. Or maybe you want to play a game where humans are the
only race available, but they belong to clans or families as different from each
other as a gnome is from a dwarf. All that is possible (and, in fact,
encouraged) with a little effort. This chapter will explain how you can turn
this Dungeon World into /your/ Dungeon World.
** Making Moves
The best place to start your journey into hacking Dungeon World is with the
moves. Many of the fronts, dangers and other elements of your game will already
contain custom moves, so it’s a natural, easy place to start. You might want to
create moves to reflect the effects of some particular threat (“When you go
alone into the Unhallowed Halls…”). You might create moves to cover something
that’s particularly important to your setting (“When you swim in the dark
waters…”). As you get more experienced you might create moves to expand a class
or create your own class entirely.
*** Getting Started
Where do moves come from? You can start a move with the trigger. Some actions
will just feel like they should be a move. This is the most common starting
point for moves. You’ll see some action coming up and feel like it’s different
enough from existing moves that it needs its own rules.

You can start with the effect. This is particularly useful for class moves. You
know that casting a spell is something that the wizard does, so what triggers
that effect?

Rarely, you can even start with the mechanics. Sometimes you’ll think of
something cool, like a tamed demon whose happiness is a constantly varying stat,
and go from there. Be wary of any idea that’s entirely mechanical. Since moves
always start and end with the fiction, a mechanical idea is the least important
bit of the move.

You can always use a move from another game, too. Dungeon World is just one of a
handful of games that use moves and you might be inspired by one of those. It’s
often not too difficult to modify an existing move for use in Dungeon World.
*** Types of Moves
What role the move is fulfilling determines what kind of move you’re creating.

Moves for dealing with the environment or special features you’ve added to
Dungeon World are special moves. These moves are usually the GM’s domain, a
place to make parts of the world stand out. Since moves are always triggered by
the players, most moves like this should be written or printed somewhere
everyone can look them over unless the move covers something that the player
characters wouldn’t have any idea about.

Moves that reflect some special competency or power, or something the players
do, are usually class moves. If the move is clearly tied to a specific class,
add it to that class. If the move is tied to some concept that multiple classes
might have access to, like a move only accessible to those that have seen beyond
Death’s Black Gates, you can create a compendium class for those moves. A
compendium class is like a mini-class, it’s a collection of moves around a
fictional theme. We’ll deal with them in more detail later.

If your move is something the players do but isn’t associated with any specific
theme or class it’s probably a basic or special move. If it comes up all the
time it’s a basic move, if it comes up more rarely it’s a special move.

Moves made by the players in response to monsters, such as the effects of a
disease or pressing on despite a focused blast of wind from an air elemental,
are player moves associated with that monster. Player moves associated with a
monster are fairly rare, most of the ways a player will interact with a monster
are covered by the basic and class moves.

Moves made by monsters against the players aren’t player moves at all. They’re
monster moves, simple statements of what the monster does. Trying to make every
monster move into a player move will seriously hamper your creativity.
*** World Moves
Your Dungeon World is full of fantastic things, right? You’re likely to find
that some of those fantastic things deserve or demand custom moves to reflect
exactly what they do. Consider this one from Chris Bennet:
When you *open a sewer hatch*, roll+STR: ✴On a 10+, choose 2. ✴On a 7–9 choose
1.
    - You avoid being covered in feces and rotting animal entrails from the
      sewers above.
    - You avoid having a gelatinous cube land on you.
    - You find a secret back entrance to where the merchant’s daughter is being
      held.

This move is strong because it is tied strongly to a particular place at a
particular time. This move was written by request for Jason Morningstar’s
Dungeon World game as the players entered some particularly horrible sewers to
find a powerful merchant’s daughter. Two of the options here are very directly
tied to that precise situation.

Why would you write this move instead of just using defy danger? You wouldn’t,
always. Opening a pressurized sewer hatch is certainly dangerous, you could use
defy danger. This move does have the advantage of setting up the choices ahead
of time. This is actually a very strong technique: if there’s a particular
situation that is likely to cause defy danger, you can write a custom move that
describes the tough choice to be made to save yourself some thinking in the
moment.

The other strength of moves like this is they call out something as important.
By making the trigger “when you open a sewer hatch” instead of “when you act
despite an imminent threat” the move calls out that these sewers are always
dangerous.
*** Class Moves
Each class has enough moves to take it through tenth level but that doesn’t mean
you can’t add more. Adding moves to a class can demonstrate your idea of Dungeon
World. Take this one, for example:
When you *claim a room for your deity*, mark every entrance and roll+WIS: ✴On a
10+, the room is peacebonded: no one can take action to cause physical harm
within it. ✴On a 7–9, the room is peacebonded, but the show of divine power
draws attention. You can dismiss the peacebond as you see fit.
This move presents a slightly different side of Dungeon World, one that can
demand peace (something that usually doesn’t come easily to PCs). This may not
be right for every Dungeon World game, but it’s a great way to show how your
Dungeon World looks, reflected in the characters.

When adding a move, look carefully at what class it belongs to. Avoid giving a
class moves that infringe on another class’s areas of expertise. If the thief
can cast spells just as well as the wizard the wizard is likely to feel
marginalized. This is why the multiclass moves act as one level lower, so that
each class’s niche is somewhat protected.

Be careful with any move that provides the same benefit as an existing move even
if the trigger is different. Moves that add to damage, in particular, should be
avoided for the most part unless carefully crafted with interesting triggers.
The same is true of moves that add to armor. The classes at present have damage
and armor increases that reflect the overall danger of Dungeon World. Giving
them more can negate potential threats.
** New Classes
Once you’ve gotten your feet wet creating new moves and customizing the classes
in Dungeon World, you’ll likely notice something. A class is just a collection
of themed moves that work together to create a certain set of abilities and
qualities that give the class their unique feel. If you’re up for it, creating a
new class is the next natural step along the way.

Your first consideration should be how the class relates to the existing
classes. No character exists in isolation, so you should think carefully about
why this class is different.

An excellent first step to creating a new class is to think about what fictional
characters you’d like to take inspiration from. Don’t slavishly follow what that
fictional character can do (after all, they weren’t in Dungeon World) but use
them as a guide for what’s so cool about that character.

The inspirations for the classes in this book are fairly clear, and made clearer
by the notes in the margins. Note that not every inspiration is taken entirely:
the wizards of Discworld inspired the slightly pompous style of the wizard, but
the wizard is far more competent and casts spells more like a wizard from
Vance’s Dying Earth. The inspiration is one of style, not an attempt to recreate
what a certain character could do in a certain book.

With a clear idea in mind you have a few basic steps that aren’t a concern when
writing single moves: HP, Bonds, Look, equipment, alignment, races.

A class’s HP is some base+Constitution. Base HP is almost always 4, 6, 8, or 10.
Having more HP than the fighter and paladin will take the spotlight away from
those characters unless you’re careful. Having less HP than the wizard is
probably character suicide. 4 base HP makes for a class that is deliberately
fragile, they’ll need help from others when the swords come out. 6 base HP is
for classes that aren’t ready to fight, but can at least take a hit. 8 base HP
is enough to take some hits and get into combat a little, while 10 base HP is
for skilled warriors and those who have no fear of battle.

Damage is chosen from the dice available: d4, d6, d8, d10. The classes presented
here all use a single die with no static bonus, but there’s no reason not to
experiment with other options: 2d4 or 1d6+2, for example. High HP and damage
tend to go together, but your new class could be a pacifistic brick wall or a
glass cannon—fragile but dangerous.

Alignments show the starting outlook of the class. Most classes will have
Neutral as an option, since only the most dedicated classes are so tied up to an
ideal that the self can’t come first. A good alignment move is something that
happens with some regularity and guides the player to a particular type of
action they might not otherwise consider. An alignment that happens as part of
the normal course of play, like “When you gain treasure…,” doesn’t really show
the character’s ideals. Adding some requirements, maybe “When you gain treasure
through lies and deceit…,” adds an element of ideals. Now the alignment says
something about the character (they prize pulling a con on the unsuspecting) and
requires the player to think about how they play. Alignment is a telling fact
about the class in the world, too. Everyone knows that paladins are supposed to
be paragons of Good and Law, right?

Bonds are where the class’ outlook shines through. It’s the place where you, the
designer, will most clearly interact with the player at character creation.
Unless the class is particularly social or antisocial, write four bonds. If the
class is very connected to others, add a bond; if they’re cloistered, remove
one. Avoid bonds that dictate a moral or ethical stance but do think about how
your class interacts with their allies—the thief steals things but helps protect
the party from traps, the fighter defends his allies and kills monsters that
might harm them, the wizard knows secret knowledge and shares or hoards it. You
can use the rules for writing new bonds as a starting point, but avoid including
proper names in starting bonds.

Look is largely left to your imagination. This is an excellent spot to think
about your fictional inspiration. What did they look like? How could they look
different? Including at least one choice about clothes helps establish style
without making the player think about buying clothes.

The equipment choices should always include at least one weapon option and one
armor option unless the class is clearly lacking in fighting skill. Dungeon
rations are also pretty much required; a starting character without food going
into a dangerous area borders on stupid.
*** Compendium Classes
A compendium class is a class only available to higher level characters who meet
specific requirements. They’re called compendium classes because they first
appeared in the Compendiums for Dungeon World Basic. A compendium class is the
way to go for a concept that can be layered onto multiple other classes.

The basic structure of a compendium class is to have a starting move that is
available only to characters who have had a certain experience, like this:
When you enter the bodily presence of a god or their avatar the next time you
gain a level you can choose this move instead of a move from your class:
*** Divine Bond
When you write a new bond, instead of using the name of another character you
can use the name of a deity you’ve had contact with. Anytime a bond with a deity
applies to the current situation you can mark it off (as if it was resolved) to
call on the deity’s favor in a clear and decisive way that the GM describes. At
the end of the session you then replace the marked off bond with a new one, with
a deity or player character.
Note that the move is only available after the character has done a specific
thing, and even then only at their next level. Compendium classes are best when
they rely on what the character has done, not stat prerequisites or anything
that happens without the player’s action. A compendium class that is available
to anyone who just gained 5th level doesn’t stand for much; one that only
applies if you’ve been to Death’s Black Gates and lived to tell the tale is more
interesting.

A compendium class also usually has 2–3 moves that can be taken only if the
starting move is taken. These are just like normal class moves, just with the
requirement that you have to have already taken the starting compendium class
move.

Compendium classes are ideal for concepts that don’t quite inspire a full class.
If you can’t think of what the class looks like or how much HP it has, or if the
class overlaps with existing classes, it’s probably better as a compendium
class.
** Adventure Moves
Adventure moves deal directly with the adventure underway. They can move the
action along, change the rewards, or transition from one adventure to another.

If you’re running a short game, maybe at a convention or game day, you may find
that you want to front-load the experience a little more. Here’s a move that
covers “the adventure so far” so that you can get straight into a short game in
media res.
Stalwart Fighter: As if the bandits weren’t bad enough! As if all the sword
wounds, bruises and beatings at the hands of your enemies were insufficient—now
this. Trapped underground with your adventuring companions when all you wanted
was to return to the town and spend your well-earned bounty. No such luck,
warrior. Sharpen that sword! Certainly, the others will need your protecting
before safety is found. Just like last time. Once more into the breach, right? I
swear, one of these fellows must owe you a favor or two by now…

Have a look around and roll+CHA. ✴On a 10+, choose two party members. ✴On a 7–9,
choose just one. ✴On a 6-, you’re surrounded by ingrates.
At a moment of need, you can cash in a favor owed you by one of the party
members chosen. They must change their action to one of your choosing, once. You
may not give them an action that would involve them directly taking damage,
giving up a magic item they already own or coming to immediate harm. Use it to
make them agree with you, or give you that extra ration you want, or giving you
their slot in the loot lottery. Leverage is sweet.
The most important part of this move is not the roll or the effect, but the
information and tone. It sets the stage for a quick adventure and gives the
player reading it a starting point to work with. The roll and result here are
interesting, but don’t greatly change the flow of the game. Handing out a set of
these, one to each player, along with a playbook, is a great way to run a con
game.

You can also adapt the End of Session move to reflect the adventure you’re
running. When doing this it’s key that you show the players the new End of
Session move. The goal isn’t to keep them in the dark about what earns XP, but
to make the XP awards tie directly to this adventure.
When you end the session, instead of using the normal end of session questions,
use these:
    - Did we learn something about the Cult of the Scaled God?
    - Did we rescue a captured villager or help defend the village of Secor?
    - Did we defeat a major agent of the Cult of the Scaled God?
*** Move Structure
Moves always follow a similar structure. The most basic parts of a move are the
trigger (“when…”) and the effect (“then…”). Every move follows this basic
format.
*** Triggers
Triggers are often fictional actions undertaken by the player characters but
they can also be part of character creation or trigger at the beginning or end
of a session. Note that a trigger never deals with precise units of time. Don’t
write a move that begins “When you start a round adjacent to a dragon.” There’s
no rounds (and adjacent is maybe not the best phrasing, as it sounds removed
from the fiction of /standing next to a damned fire-breathing dragon/). Prepare
Spells isn’t “When you spend one hour studying your spellbook” for good reason.
Time in Dungeon World is a bit fluid, like in a movie where pacing depends on
the circumstances. Don’t rely on concrete units either around the table (rounds)
or in the fiction (seconds, minutes, days).

Here are some broad types of triggers:
    - *When a character takes action*. Examples: Discern Realities, Arcane Art
       (Bard), Command (Ranger).
    - *When a character takes action under specific circumstances*. Examples:
       Hack and Slash, Seeing Red (Fighter), Backstab (Thief).
    - *When circumstances dictate, no character action*. Examples: Order
       Hirelings, End of Session.
    - *When a character uses a thing*. Examples: Magic items, Heirloom
       (Fighter).
    - *From now on*. Examples: Serenity (Cleric), Poisoner (Thief).
*** Effect
Moves effects can be anything you can think of; they are as limitless as your
ideas. Don’t feel constrained to making rolls, +1 bonuses, and swapping stats.
Since all moves flow from the fiction, a fictional effect like “They treat you
as a friend” is just as powerful and useful as +1 forward—maybe more so.

Here are some broad types of effects, any given move may use more than one of
them:
    - *Roll*. Examples: Defy Danger, Cast a Spell (Wizard), Called Shot
       (Ranger).
    - *Substitute stats*. Examples: Dwarf (Fighter).
    - *Negate damage*. Examples: Man's Best Friend (Ranger).
    - *Give a bonus or penalty, forward or ongoing.* Examples: Underdog (Thief),
       Smite (Paladin).
    - *Deal or heal damage*. Examples: Volley, Backstab (Thief), Arcane Art
       (Bard).
    - *Choose options*. Examples: Spout Lore, Discern Realities, Ritual
       (Wizard).
    - *Hold & Spend*. Examples: Dominate (Wizard spell), Trap Expert (Thief).
    - *Ask & Answer*. Examples: Charming and Open (Bard), Spout Lore.
    - *Change circumstances*. Examples: Reputation (Bard).
    - *Mark experience*. Examples: End of Session.
    - *Call for more information*. Examples: Parley, Ritual (Wizard).
    - *Add options*. Examples: Called Shot (Ranger).
** Changing the Basics
Moves can also change the basic structure of the game. Consider this one, to
avoid the use of damage dice:
When you would deal damage, instead of rolling the dice, substitute each dice
with the listed number. d4 becomes 2, d6 becomes 3, d8 becomes 4, d10 becomes 5,
d12 becomes 6.
Moves like this change one of the basic features of the game. Be very careful
with moves that muck with the fundamentals. Moves should never contradict the
GM’s principles or agenda, or break the basic “take the action to gain the
effect” rule.

There are some parts of the game that are exceptionally easy to change. The
amount of XP to level reflects our view, but you can easily make leveling more
or less rare. As well, the kinds of things players are awarded XP for can be
easily changed—if your game isn’t about exploring, fighting monsters and finding
treasure, change the End of Session move to reflect that difference. Make sure
to share it with your players before you start the game.

Another basic that’s occasionally asked for is a way to make, say, fighting a
dragon harder. The best answer here is that fighting a dragon is harder because
the dragon is fictionally stronger. Just stabbing a dragon with a normal blade
isn’t hack and slash because a typical blade can’t hurt it. If, however, that
isn’t enough, consider this move from Vincent Baker, originally from Apocalypse
World (reworded slightly to match Dungeon World rules):
When a player makes a move and the GM judges it especially difficult, the player
takes -1 to the roll. When a player’s character makes a move and the GM judges
it clearly beyond them, the player takes -2 to the roll.
The problem with this move is that the move no longer reflects anything
concrete. Instead, the move is a prompt for the GM to make judgment calls with
no clear framework. If you find yourself writing this custom move, consider what
difficulty you’re really trying to capture and make a custom move for that
instead. That said, this is a valid custom move, if you feel it’s needed.
** Development of a Move
Let’s look at how one move developed over time. Hack and slash was one of the
earliest Dungeon World moves, originally written by Tony Dowler. The first
version looked like this (this version has been reformatted and edited for
grammar only):
When you wade into combat, attacking your enemies, deal damage to the enemy
you’re attacking, take that enemy’s damage, and roll+Str. ✴On a 10+, choose 2.
✴On a 7–9 choose 1.
    - Prevent one ally from taking damage this round
    - Kill one enemy of lower level than you or deal max damage to otherwise
    - Put an enemy right where you want them (drive them off, prevent them from
      fleeing, etc.)
    - Divide your damage amongst any number of targets you can reach with your
      weapon
The first problem with this move is that one of the options, preventing damage,
is far less useful than the others. Being able to outright kill an enemy is
nearly always better than preventing that enemy from doing damage. The first
major revision was to drop that option:
When you wade into combat, attacking your enemies, deal damage to the enemy
you’re attacking, take that enemy’s damage, and roll+Str. ✴On a 10+ choose 2.
✴On a 7–9 choose 1.
    - Kill one enemy of lower level than you or deal max damage to otherwise
    - Put an enemy right where you want them (drive them off, prevent them from
      fleeing, etc.)
    - Divide your damage amongst any number of targets you can reach with your
      weapon
This left only three options which is a great number of options to have when a
10+ lets you pick two. The player making the move always had to not choose one
option. All of the options are also clearly useful. But there’s still an issue,
easily the biggest issue with this move: the fictional action doesn’t tightly
relate to the outcome.

Consider this situation: Gregor attacks an eagle lord with his mighty axe. He
describes his fictional action: “I swing my axe right down on his wing with a
big overhead chop.” Then he rolls the move, gets a 10, and makes his choices.
Max damage is a clear choice and comes right from the fiction. The other
options, however, don’t make much sense. If he chooses to divide his damage, how
does that flow from his one fictional attack? How did that one chop also hit the
treant behind him?

Scoping down the fictional effect of the move lead to this version:
When you attack an enemy who can defend themselves, roll+Str. ✴On a 10+, you
deal your damage but your enemy does not get to deal theirs to you. If you
choose, you can take your enemy’s damage and deal double damage to the enemy.
✴On a 7–9, you take the enemy’s damage and deal your damage.
Here the move now has only the effects that could clearly follow from a single
attack. Any action that couldn’t reasonably lead to a counterattack isn’t hack
and slash, so now the trigger matches the effects. Unfortunately double damage
was a bit much, so we changed it to this:
When you attack an enemy in melee, roll+Str. ✴On a 7–9, you deal your damage to
the enemy and take their damage. ✴On a 10+ you deal your damage to the enemy.
You can choose to also take the enemy’s damage to deal +2 damage.
+2 damage is a clear advantage, but not a game breaker. The only problem here is
that it reduced the effects of an attack to taking damage. Monsters do so much
more than just take away your HP; monsters hurl you about the room and destroy
the ground you stand on, why can’t they do that in response?
When you attack an enemy in melee, roll+Str. ✴On a 10+, you deal your damage to
the enemy and avoid their attack. At your option, you may choose to do +1d6
damage but expose yourself to the enemy’s attack. ✴On a 7–9, you deal your
damage to the enemy and the enemy makes an attack against you.
This version (the final one) allows a monster to “attack” not just deal damage.
That opens up a whole host of interesting monster moves to be used. +1d6 damage
instead of +2 makes the choice more exciting (and slightly more powerful). The
rewording adds clarity.
** The GM
Changing the GM’s side of the rules is an entirely different beast from writing
custom player moves. Writing GM moves is the easy part. Since a GM move is just
a statement of something that fictionally happens, feel free to write new ones
as you please. Most of the time you’ll find they’re just specific cases of one
of the moves already established, but occasionally you’ll come across something
new. Just keep in mind the spectrum of hard to soft moves, your principles, and
your agenda, and you’ll be fine.

Changing the GM’s agenda or principles is one of the biggest changes you can
make to the game. Changing these areas will likely require changes throughout
the rest of the game, plus playtesting to nail it all down.

*Play to find out what happens* is the least changeable part of the GM’s agenda.
 Other options, like “play towards your set plot” or “play to challenge the
 players’ skills” will be resisted pretty strongly by the other rules. The moves
 give the players abilities that can change the course of an planned adventure
 quite quickly; if you’re not playing to find out what happens you’ll have to
 resist the moves at every step or rewrite many of them.

*Fill the characters’ lives with adventure* could be rephrased, but it’s hard to
 really change. “Fill the characters’ lives with intrigue” might work, but
 intrigue just seems like a type of adventure. Removing this agenda entirely
 will require major reworking since the move structure is based on this. The
 effects of a miss and the GM’s soft moves are all there to create a life of
 adventure.

*Portraying a fantastic world* is maybe the easiest to change but it still
 requires considerable rewriting of the class moves. A historical world, a grim
 world, or a utopian world are all possible, but you’ll need to carefully
 rethink many moves. A historical world will require magic, equipment, and
 several other sections to be nearly entirely rewritten or removed. A grim world
 can only survive if the players’ moves come with darker costs. A utopian world
 won’t need many of the moves as written. Still, this is the easiest part of the
 agenda to change, since it requires changing the moves, not the basic
 structures of the game.

The GM’s principles are more mutable than the agenda but still can seriously
change the game with only minor modifications. *Address the characters, not the
players; Make your move, but misdirect; Never speak the name of your move; Begin
and end with the fiction;* and *Be a fan of the characters* are the most
important principles. Without these the conversation of play and the use of
moves is likely to break down.

*Embrace the fantastic; Give every monster life; Name every person; Think
 Dangerous;* and *Give them something to work towards* are key to the spirit of
 Dungeon World and fantasy exploration. These are changeable, but they amount to
 changing the setting of the game. If you want to change any of these, you may
 have to make changes to all of them.

*Leave Blanks; Sometimes, let them decide;* and *Ask questions and use the
 answers* are important to running Dungeon World well. They also apply to many
 other games in the same style. The game will be diminished without them, but
 the conversation of play will continue. These are also some of the most
 portable principles, applicable to many other games. They may even work in
 games with very different play styles.

An additional principle that some people prefer to add is *Test their bonds*.
This principle is entirely compatible with the others and with all the moves,
but it changes the focus of the game somewhat. Fronts need to be rethought to
work fully with this, and you might need to add moves that speak to it.
** Monsters
The easiest place to modify monsters is in the questions used to create them.
The simplest changes have to do with adjusting lethality or randomness to your
liking.

A more interesting change is to change the questions being asked to present a
different view of monsters. The views built into the questions imply that
monsters are more or less like other creatures: they can be of many alignments
and won’t always be opposed to the player characters. If you want to make
Dungeon World about hunting down evil monsters and destroying them, you might
rewrite some of the questions, maybe adding this:
**** The monster is Evil through and through. Choose one to reflect why it’s evil:
    - It’s an intrusion of the Old Ones Beyond the Walls: Planar, +5 damage
    - It’s a product of the Old Wizards of the Red Tower: Construct, +5 HP
    - It’s from The Time Before Man: Primordial, +5 damage, +5 HP

When creating new monster questions you can either reinterpret existing monsters
by answering the questions for them again or only use the new questions for new
monsters. If the new questions you add or change are key to your vision of
Dungeon World it’s best to redo all the monsters you use; if the question only
applies to a specific kind of monster anyway you can just use it for new
monsters.

* Thanks
* Influences
If we have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants. Hill
giants and stone giants mostly, but some frost giants and even a fire giant one
time. That got messy.

By this point it’s probably pretty obvious that Vincent Baker’s Apocalypse
World, as well as Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson’s Dungeons and Dragons are the
reason we made this game. The Dungeons and Dragons Basic Set, edited by Tom
Moldvay, and Advanced Dungeons and Dragons were our references of choice.

Our version of Alignment is closely related to Keys from Shadow of Yesterday by
Clinton R. Nixon as seen in John Harper’s Lady Blackbird.

XP on a miss can be seen in a lot of designs—the version seen in Luke Crane’s
Burning Wheel was an inspiration, but this particular take on it comes by way of
John Harper and Paul Riddle’s The Regiment.

Bonds are a perversion of Hx from Apocalypse World with a little bit of the
memories from Freemarket (by Luke Crane and Jared Sorensen) thrown in for spice.

Dungeon World wouldn’t exist without cross-pollination from many other projects
powered by the Apocalypse. Sagas of the Icelanders by Gregor Vuga, The Regiment
by Paul Riddle and John Harper, Monsterhearts by Joe Mcdaldno, and several
unpublished games by Jonathan Walton all were part of our process.

The original idea to mash Apocalypse World and D&D together belongs to our good
friend Tony Dowler. He was gracious enough to let us build on his concept and
carry it through to the shape you see today.
* Tools
Dungeon World was created in InDesign. The main fonts used are Adobe Minion Pro,
Newcomen, and Archemy.

The original text was written entirely in XML to be imported into the book
layout, the character sheet layout, and various other formats. Working in
plaintext allowed us to map to all kinds of different layouts as well as
versioning the files using Git and Github.

We developed Dungeon World a bit like you develop software, so the Github bug
tracker and Dropbox were key tools in making the game a reality.
* Special Thanks
Strasa Acimovic, Marshall Miller, Jason Morningstar, Simon Ward, Greg Cooksey,
Hamish Cameron, Kevin Weiser & the Walking Eye, Steve Segedy, John Harper, Tony
Dowler, Vincent Baker, Gary and Dave (of course).
* Contributors
Tresi Arvizo, Jeremy Friesen, Alessandro “Adam” Gianni, Lee Reilly, Nathan
Black, Adam Blinkinsop, Matt Jett, Evan Silberman
* Guild Members
Charles Boucher, PK Sullivan, Jeremy Friesen, Sara Williamson, Ara, Rob
Sanderson, John Hawkins, Chris Eng, Rob Brennan, Brian Moroz, Jonathan Abbott,
Tom Scutt, Franciolli Araujo, skullBoy72, Chris Sakkas, Ryan D. Kruse, Jason
Wood, Dylan Boates, Aaron "Tildesee" Friesen, David M. Miles, Felan Parker,
Gianmario Marrelli, Tony Dowler, Tresi Arvizo, Daniel Ornstein, Matt Silver,
Jacob Sulpice, John Mehrholz, Marshall Miller, Matthew Sullivan-Barrett, Max
Saltonstall, Adam K, John Senner, Aaron Rowell, J.B. Mannon, Sean M. Dunstan,
Thomas Ulricht, Sam Carter of Mars, Hans Chung-Otterson, Sanjay Kurichh, Ryan
Macklin, Kuba Koprowski, @ATerribleIdea, Jesse Burneko, Colin Jessup, Bryan
Rennekamp, Tom a.k.a. Warzen, Iserith, Jason Pitre, Steven Jarvis, Jim Crocker,
Hamish Cameron, Max 'Ego' Hervieux, Timothy Adamson, Christopher Grau, Josh
Rensch, John Bogart, Wes Price, Sohum Banerjea, kingston Cassidy, Alec
Fleschner, watergoesred, Matthew Gagan, Cameron Suey, Scott Acker, Christopher
Acker, Jason D. Smith, Justin Wightbred, Jarrod Farquhar-Nicol, Alan Jackson,
Joerg Bours, Joseph "UserClone" Le May, kreg mosier, Paulo_Segundo, Anthony
Martins, Joe Beason, Stuart McDermid, Vernon "Crypt-Kicker" Lingley, Matthew
Klein, Ben Glickler, Jani Mölsä, Doug Hare, Jeremiah Frye, Dan Maruschak,
Tristan Markert, Jeffrey J. A. Fuller II, Tommy Tanaka, Phil Garrad, Philip
LaRose, Kynnin Scott, Nathan 'Noofy' Roberts, Steve Segedy, Strahinja "Stras"
Acimovic, Jason Grabau
* Backers Bonded to the Book
These brave Kickstarter backers have a bond with Dungeon World, and Dungeon
World has a bond with them:
Simon Ward has seen what no other eyes could see. Matthew Sullivan-Barrett shot
the morning in the back with his Red Wings on. A recent paradox awakened my
nightmares of an anomaly within Jason's soul; I must fix it for the sake of my
sanity. A witch put a spell on Ingo. Aaron is the Gouger of the monstrous
Filibusterer. Aaron still haunts those Crooked Hills. Abrahm wrought the runes
of binding. Adam constructed the eldritch machine. Adam is the bearer of the
Book of Secrets. Adam Rajski keeps the wisdom of the ages safe. Adam rode the
world worm. Adam saved the holy feline. Ahmad and I studied under the same
mentor. Alan is the wearer of the trenchcoat of pretension. Alcionne wears the
crystal talisman. Alec comprehended the multiple meanings of the Zeugmatic
Dialogues. Aleopheus will strike down upon thee with great vengeance and furious
anger those who would attempt to poison and destroy my brothers. Aleria cannot
unsee what she has seen. Alessandro gave me loaded dice!Guard—arrest him!
Alexander was once a king; now, naught but an adventurer. Alitar is the
embodiment of Strength. Amy incants the story of the world. Andi awoke the
dormant evil. Andy always plays a bloody wizard. Andy reverse engineered the
rules of the Universe. Annti stranded me in a house of brigands. Antoine mixed
the spell components. Antti is the keeper of the forgotten lore. Arc keeps safe
the sacred sigils. Area 42 is a safe haven for adventurers. Argent accessed the
Aleph. Arvy found a mysterious tome. As wizards we are bound by birth to protect
the realm against all evil. Baern holds the bridge that his friends might
survive. Baf is watched by three sages. Balmung is the master of the Crimson
Sword. Bard enjoys smelling ancient tomes. Basilios places the celestial crown
upon his head. Basteen covered the ancient tome in fish. Bastinan braved the
fires of the Hells. Ben boondoggles. Ben spoke one of the ten secret words that
started the world. Ben uncorked a bottle of port. Bill kept the dragons well
away from the dungeons. Blake has seen the sacred vision that reveals the
impending death of your master. Bob defended the realm from the horde onslaught.
Bob keeps the secret of the ancient flame wars. Bolthan is the keeper of the
white flame. Brad evaded the demon by hiding in the shadows. Brandan unearthed
forgotten mysteries. Brandon raised the veil of darkness. Brent harnessed the
power of lightning. Brett is the keeper of Secrets. Brett Zeiler is extrenely
arrogant, but is the best at what he does. Brian controls the chaos of creation.
Brian founded a city out of chaos. brian has seen the fnords. Brian helped
batter down the door to the armory. Brian is bonded to the bonder of bonds.
Brian is searching for his father's lost sword. Brian is the inheritor of
forbidden lore. Brian is too trusting. Brian slayed the sleeping sloth. Brindy
embraced the night as the stars aligned. Brought knowledge to the masses. C & K
are together at the End. Cabuster procured the Papers of Possibility. Cade
hurled the flask. Cameron tells the old tales around the campfire. Capellan
cares not for your paltry friendship. Carl is the heir of an ominous legacy.
Carmin is the bearer of the cloak of shadows. Casey is a disciple of the Red
Star. Casidhe hoards any knowledge she discovers. Chamelaeon has discerned the
pattern of the stars. Chiang-Chen has an ancestral blade-demon in his palm. Chiv
is aeon dead and wields unearthly power. Chris begat many adventuring heroes.
Chris consults his library. Chris discovered the first seal. Chris Dulsky
summoned an unspeakable thing. Chris is the ruler of Pillow Mountain. Chris
killed the crazed cockatrice. Chris knew the lumber consortium was behind the
alien landing cover-up. Chris knows secrets even the vizier is unaware of. Chris
takes +1 forward in any game run by Adam Koebel. Christian is the bearer of the
eternal light. Christian Lindke discovered a magical new world. Chroma owes
nothing to Dark Jessop. Clark discovered the lost text (and Amanda corrected
it). Clifford keeps the Arcane Knowledge. Clinton will play an important role in
the events to come. Clyde is the keeper of the spoken word. Colin is powered by
the apocalypse dragon. Connaught strove to preserve the ancient code. Connor is
the cookie whisperer. Conrad saved my family from poverty. Corinthi brought low
carb snacks. Cork is a master of elemental magic. Cravatosaur is the befouler of
the sacred pool. Curt finds all the monsters that burst out of the ground.
Damien's blade is not magical though his skill makes it seem that way. Dan binds
the sacred tome. Dan knows the monkeys will be his undoing. Daniel discovered
the freedom of simplicity. Daniel uncovered the clockwork of the Cosmos.
Danohead is a puddingmancer nonpareil. Darkfeather unearths the lost treasure
of. Dave has unmasked the Key Master. Dave Insel the Bringer of Ultimate
Awesome. Dave on honey-dew has fed, And drunk the milk of Paradise. Dave
struggled through the 7 Hells to earn this book. David has gained the affections
of your betrothed They may not realize it, but you know this to be true. David
is burdened by the Holy Word. David is cool with whatever we say. David knew the
doppelgangers secret. David paid the price with dark magics. David revealed the
truth - to everyone but himself. David stole the secret that sealed the stair.
Dean vanquished the Great Evil of T'lorin. Deimen has some strange significance
to my god Any miracle I beseech in his name comes out reversed. Derek emerged
from the ruins carrying an ancient tome of eldritch lore. Derek released the
demon within. Derek speaks the Unspeakable Words. Dithmer is the guardian of the
forbidden tome. Dom has travelled under far stars of the future. Douglas Justice
is King of the Dwarves. Dovre the heir the the mountainking, keeper of the
ancient hall. Doyce found long-lost secrets in a forgotten library. Drake broke
the first seal. Dreamstreamer camped the Final Confrontation and put an arrow in
the Barbarian's knee. Drew is bound to no-one. Drew looted his War-Chest for
this book. Drewid spoke the arcane spell from from the ancient tome. Drnuncheon
knifed many people between the ribs. Duane has slighted me with his Terrible
Idea. Due to a magical accident she is your sister-clone. Dufresne uncovered the
means to open a portal to an unholy dimension. Duke Monte hung out with the
Goblins. Dungeon World taught Boabdil the power of Awesomancy. Dustin found them
in the darkness. Dwarven Chris kept dying over and over. Dylan knows the song to
summon the spirit wolf by heart. Dylan plays with some seriously scary lizard
men. Dylan summoned forth that which can not be named. Edomaur is the maker of
the wood swords of the green magic. Edouard fears Thulsa's rage, it will one day
turn on us. Einroy defended the wall. Elkan casts good ol' Magic Missile. Elric
wove the web. Eric sacrificed an eye to peer into the future. Erik is running
low on hearts. Erik reps Thri-Kreen life. Ernesto made the Barbarian happen.
Experience points be damned John will not slay another farmer! Falcros wields
the sphere of power. Fax shifted the walls of the dungeon. Fel stole the cursed
book. Felan wields a stalagmite as an improvised weapon. Felix has sealed away
the cursed axe. Fiddy is the master of many worlds. Finnian stole three pages
from the book of rituals. Flavio is the bearer of the hat of grumpyness. For
Gavin, the Truth is more holy than the Book. Fox kept the nexus of portal
conduits concealed. Francis vainquished the darkness with but a smile. Fred has
uncovered the true nature of reality. Fred was lost to reason when he donned the
Evil Hat. Gabriel knows the names of all the stars in the sky. Gant and Roland
have faced the trials of world, and they have touched Paradise. Garry awakened
ancient magics. Gary Hoggatt may be a descendant of Erdrick. George answered the
call of the Final Trump. Ghost Bear is haunted by the spirits of those he have
defeated. Gilmaldor Half-Eleven is the silent assassin lurking in the shadows.
Gina cast the spell of eternal marshmallows. Gip has the strength to act. Glenn
explored the lost catacombs. Godfrey is a paragon of goodness and wisdom; when
in doubt, I defer to their judgement. Gondry mocked my beliefs. Grandmaster
Jarrod asks, “When type of monster is it?”. Greenie spoke the Unutterable Name,
dooming us all. Greg discovered the mystifying elixir. Gregor Hutton had
foreseen it. Grimwald is trying to unlock the secrets of the scroll of winds.
Hamish is the blood-stained sword of the Black Elf nation. Hans holds the key to
weaving spells of Uncertainty. Hawk has the largest pile of fail XP. Henry
dreamed of places strange. Herman always gets the flaming sword. Hilary is
thinking what you are thinking. I am Dan's long lost sibling. Ianovos restored
the link to the ancestral eight. Ios heard the call of the Wild Hunt, and never
returned. Irene will make the last stand. Irina was taught to make secret
potions by the old woman. Isabelle and Emma have shown me the way, now I hope to
return the favour. Isen is the defender of the Silverhand. J escaped the hook
that hungers. Jack inexplicably can understand the language of Dragons. Jack
squandered his only Wish on a good deed. Jake has a jinx on him. James explored
all of the wizardly tangents. James held no love but for money, and trusted
no-one but his blade. James is the tester of many tablets. Jamie waits in the
shadows. Jarod founded the Musty Dragon Inn franchise. Jason drank from the well
of common sense. Jason looted the temple of the Ancient Ones. Jason rides the
Glyphon. Jay is the wielder of the magical boot of horse theft. JB was buried
with the Opal of Xul-Gar. Jeff turned down his right to the crown of the goblin
kingdom. Jeffrey struggled not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers,
against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the
spiritual forces of evil in outer realms. Jeffy poked a toothpick through the
membrane. Jeremiah was taken by horrors of the deep Never to be seen again.
Jeremy is always one book away from a complete set. Jeremy slew a red dragon,
costing him a limb. Jeremy's mind spent lifetimes wandering the spirit realms,
in a deep lotus-trance. Jerome stitched the bindings of the ancient tome. Jess
opened a Doorway not fit for mortal souls. Jim climbed the Infinite Tower. Jingo
uses the stone, one last time. Joe the mythical waffle taunter. Joe's campaign
fronts read like the script from a telenovela. Joel shattered the Ancients'
ignorance. Joerg is the guardian and wielder of the first sword. Johann warder
of the wyrd. John cares deeply for someone, but they are kept apart. John is the
keeper of the sacred kennel. John must cleanse his gear daily of evil spirits.
John once forged a celestial breastplate. John sundered the Faithless Gate.
Johnstone doesn't like anything. Jon doesn't see the point. Jon McCarty and I
had a violent falling out. Jonathan brandishes the vorpal great axe. Joseph
“UserClone” Le May NEEDS FOOD BADLY! Joseph has awakened what lurks in the deep.
Josh Flint stole pages from the leaves of the world tree. Josh is bearer of
troubling truth. Josh spoke the unspeakable tale. Josh was there in the Dawn
Times. Joshua enscribed the mark of the ereboi huntsman. Joshua is the ally of
the animals of the forest. Joshuha forged the perfect weapon. João is the master
of the large sack. JP Sauers traversed the outer planes. Julien Pirou is in the
secret world behind the GM's screen. Justin hid something beautiful in a
terrible, deep dungeon. Justin Wightbred lead the charge against unnecessary
escalation. Jürgen Mayer is the shadow that kills you in the night. Kairam is
the immortal sage of the swamps. Karuk broke the glittering crown. Kate sees
barmaids. Keith drew on the forbidden power that dwells below. Keith is the
undiscovered scion of the hidden realm. Keith the Keeper of Arcane Lore. Keith
will explore Dungeon World with any who are willing to Adventure! Kem teaches
that the only true weapon is the mind. Ken is the servant of the Secret Spring.
Kenny unlock the ancient gate. Kestral still walks Insanity's Edge. Kevin is a
disciple of His Weirdness: Al Yankovic. Kevin is entrusted with secret, ancient
knowledge. Kevin is the arcane master of the ambulatory eye. Kingston leads old
friends into battle with Teuthus, the God who crawls beneath the waves. Kirby
drank from the Ewer of Memories. Kreg carried the Swagger Stick everywhere he
went. Kristopher despises most people, but keeps it to himself if he thinks you
might by useful Savage invective befalls those that have no use. Kurt tumbled
through the demon door. Kyle owes fealty to the Queen of Winter. Kyree rules the
ruins with fortune and fate. Larry the unprintable. Laura has special luck.
Lazaar is the master of whispers. Leo Lalande opened the astral rift between
worlds. Leslie grinds on towards the coming dawn. Lidrick Barrisbren strung his
Lute of Lightning. Liri rejected the fulfilling of her deepest wish by the
goddess. Logan lost the phylactery. Lucias got tangeled in wizard sleeves.
Lucien is the light that binds and demands. Luis crossed oceans of time. Lukas
fought at the Gates of Oblivion. Luke cannot use the force. Luke has quenched
the fire of creation. LXD lives on! Lythias sought the secrets of the Serpents'
Labyrinth. Mabon breathes in the wonder of the night sky. Magic brought down the
gate. Makr stole a tear from the Eye of the World. Malabreiga's sinuous body
lies wreathed in purple flame. Malo delved down and down again, deep into the
world. Manilla has given me enlightenment that I can never repay. Marc has kept
the Old Ways secret all his years. Marco is the Keeper of Truth. Margaret delves
tomes for knowledge. Marielle never learned how to read and has been faking it
this whole time. Mark awoke the gods. Mark bears the brands of the seven holy
silences. Mark cooked breakfast at the gates of darkness. Mark has sung the
halfling song. Mark immanentized the eschaton. Markku knows where the Arkenstone
is located. Markus has seduced the incubus of the seven cauldrons. Marshall
married my sister when no one else would. Martin unearthed the antediluvian
arcana. Mary knows what we say to Death. Matt delivered the chalice to the
village elders. Matt discovered a wonderful forest for His family. Matt followed
the echoes of eternity. Matt was bemused by Gnomish poetry. Matthew 'Jarikith'
Monagon rolled the Polyhedrons of Chaos. Matthew is the chosen vessel of the
Spirit of Wisdom. Matthew shot morning in the back with his Red Wings on.
Matthias took up the nearest tome and thumbed it through. Mattie promised to
teach me the weaknesses of the human mind. Meg is the keeper of all my stories.
Melody keeps the forbidden secrets. Mendez stole the Wudang Manual Again. Micah
is the bane of the demon lord, slayer of the spider priest, spiller of the
silver blood. Michael dreams of worlds inside everyday objects. Michael knows
the ancient rhyme. Michael read the starry wisdom between the words. Michael
will sacrifice everything and everyone to achieve his goal. Mike faced the
dragon-bears. Milo thinks the section you need to read is around page 56.
Mitchifer is the chosen of the God of Death. Mo is the holder of the flame.
Murgh Bpurn does it virtually all the time. Nathan is the inheritor of a great
and mysterious power. Neal found the darkness within. Nemo detected slanting
passages. Nex hides in the shadows. Nicholas consumed the mythical biter
brewery's blinding beer. Nicholas' ‚Äúplan B‚Äù is kill it with fire, acceptible
at any time. Nick is heir to both warring kingdoms. Nick is the guardian of the
forbidden knowledge. Nick is the keeper of the ancient tome. Nikolai is the
keeper of the Talisman of the Ranging Pack. NinjaDebugger liberated this book
from the Library of the Ages. Noam is still residing at the bottom of that pit
trap. Noofy has adventured all over the world to be re-united with his True
Love. Nora feeds the trolls. Okerstroker broods in the corner with a watchful
eye. Oliver is the master of a thousand spells. Oliver turned out to be
good-natured, generous and likeable; in three days no one could stand him.
Oliver was menaced by a giant owl. Oscar is the Secret Fire. Oscart knows, To
Keep The Peace, Prepare For War. Owen attacked the darkness. Owen is the
ringmaster of the workers of dark creation. Pat presided over the sacred smoke
ceremony celebrating peace between the tribes-men of plains . Paul and I have
shared dreams sent to us from subaquatic temples of cyclopean stone. Pego was
there when ‚ÄúPosta!Pizza!Pacco!Äù was uttered. Percy unveiled the secret of the
Hoss. Peter knows that The Path to Wisdom lies down the Eternal Road. Petrus is
nearly proficient with the double-club. Phil is the speaker of dreamtruth.
Philip opened the archives and discovered a World of Dungeons. Philippe Debar
was blessed once and then thrice. Quinn unlocked the ancient armory. Raf is the
source of cosmic grumpiness. Ragnar taught me how to cook on the road.
Rainswept's sorrow is here with him. Rausdour hates bats. Ray is master of the
dungeon and slave to the dice. Redhan banished an ancient evil. Ren√© deciphered
the riddle of the thousand deaths. Rhovanor has a shard of the cup of Eternal
Life implanted in his chest. Richard found inner harmony. Richard writes with
the sacred ink of the ancients. Richard, Speaker to the Modrons. Rick bears an
ominous mark in the superstitions of my people. Rick forgot the most important
lesson. Rishi “mistakenly” ate an owlbear pellet. Rob holds the keys to the
locks. Rob is lost in a forbidden tome of arcane knowledge. Rob is the chosen
protector of the sacred ale. Rob Justice sleeps in the pines. Rob kicked down
the door in the name of the King. Rob shot the food. Rob united the Bee
Kingdoms. Rob wields the hand, as he journey's forth with the SOG & SAUF. Robert
Bruce told you exactly what you wanted to hear. Robert helped me in a time of
need. Rocha published Dungeon World in Brazil! Rodrigo is the teller of tales.
Roman is the Keeper of the Temple Ruins. Ross was trusted with keeping the
ancient tome. Rune is the wielder of the warhammer of grim irritation. Russell
is the bearer of the sacred twenty sider. Rusty looked into the Mind of
Darkness. Ryan is He Who Stalks Beyond the Walls. Ryan is the Master of the
Dungeon. Ryan spoke the word. Ryan Webster is the prince who married his
princess. Sage opened his brain to the Worm God first, mmm, dirt. Sally is a
friend of the white cat. Sam is the Seeker of Knowledge. Sam wielded the Flame
of Creation. Samuel stood with them at the end. Savannah possesses a true
strength that cannot be overcome. Sayler is a hoopy frood He deserves a new
character class: Spelljammer Buccaneer! Scathaigh is the eternal Herald of the
Starshadow. Scott Belchak bears the thanks of the creators. Scott delved deep
into the Book and came out changed. Scott was taken unawares. Sean Dunstan
spread word of the wonders of the dungeon to the darkest corners of the world.
Sean is heart-bound to Shawna Lee through the Rite of Stone Wood. Sean punched a
dungeon right in the face. Sean secretly transcribes the hieroglyphs of the RJS
Empire. Sean unrolled the freshly minted scroll. Sean was here! Shane Knysh is
the last royal cartographer of the united southern realms. Shane seeks what the
ancients knew, but chose to hide. Shannon opened the book of the forbidden.
Shawn was jailed for a crime that I committed. Silj is completely insane! Simba
left his mark on the town, leaving it under his protection. Simon carried the
torch for no man. Skender dicovered the tarnished Glinn circlet. Slay-Tor used
the Hardcover to shatter the spines of lesser books. Someone will choose poorly
and be killed, unless I intervene. Sophie uses this tome to bend realities.
Sovern trusts in the creators. Stacey raised the standard of Friendship high
upon the battlefield. StacyRex possesses the Eternal Bag of Happiness. Stefan is
the keeper of knowledge. Stella Christina Hall woke up in the middle of each
night to learn more from this book. Stephen is the keeper of the book of
secrets! Steve has emerged victorious! Steve is sworn in life and death to his
son Connor. Steve sang throughout the night. Steve wants to know who you truly
love. Steven has opened the secret eye of Angra Mainyu. Stew lead the charge
against the horned dragon. Stewart saw into the spaces between the spaces. Stras
is the one that keeps carving faces on all the trees in the Godswood. Tara
fought the gazebo. Tewhill broke the bugbear's will. The bigger they are, the
harder Michele hits. The Book has filled my mind with erudition. The Crimson
Dragon falls to my demon blade. The Demonlords await the Convergence. The host
speaks for the gophers. The Legions of Gremlins unearthed the deathly tomb. The
Lord's Secret mistress is Adrian. The only boundaries that exist are those of
the mind. The pale cur sleeps on the book, either growling or snoring. The party
shivered at the sinister sound. The prophetess Seldanha remains ever watchful of
the vizier's machinations. The Rogue learned his trade from the ancient
Assassin's Guild. Thom braved the sideways tower. Thomas decieved the others.
Thoradin saved the vale from the mighty orc king. Thorgrim bears the Book of
Grudges. Thunder is Newt's brother, he rides the winds of destiny! Tim found his
courage in the length of long halls and the depth of blue eyes. Tim unearthed
the true history. Tleroth stood and held the breach. Together, Cazantyl and I
escaped from a cult. Tom upheld our ancient honors. Tomar can see to the heart
of anything. Tony survived the demi-lich. toridas unleashes the power within.
Tran knows where the shoggoth lies dormant. Travis really should have known
better Really. Tresi completed a perilous journey to the smoldering mountains.
Tristan invoked the forbidden voice. Tucker is the most worthy of all of Carles'
disciples. Tulip knows where the Bees are. Typhur stood fast, despite the cost.
Tyson reps Thri-Kreen life. Ulai stands vigilant at the gate. Ungerford's brain
aches with the want of knowing. Valtiel is in league with the Fair Folk. Veng
has gained mastery of the ancient secrets. Vicki is a wannabe (though hopefully
not forever) Renaissance woman :). Vidal is the Paladin of the Great North.
Vincent walks under the scrying sun. Vivian stole the Knight's heart. Voodoo
marveled at the discovery of the World. Warren wondered what bond words to
write. Warzen has a new cat familiar. Wesley expressed disinterest in writing
this. Wesley was the guardian of the blind. Whitney awakened the forgotten gods.
Will knows the Spectre's secret name. Will was initiated into the conspiracy of
the Duke's court. William knows the secret that will undo everything. Willow is
the conqueror of fallen gods. With words a piece of Brian's spirit will live on
in this tome. WolfSamurai forever sealed away ancient evils from the world.
Wordman wears the silver mask. Xthulu rose from a watery grave. Yet again
following Wightbred into strange dungeons. Yrkoon wields the soul-drinking
sword. Zachary learned an ancient song, but fears the day when he will be called
upon to sing it. Zed journeyed to the frigid north to meet Jex. Zed of Sosaria
stepped through the gate eager to explore. Zhang Fei has a history of causing
strife among his subordinates I would do best to keep my distance from him. Zirk
came to chew bubblegum and play games, and he's all out of bubblegum.
* Kickstarter Backers
“Blue Hair Bob” Puckett, “Evil” Avi Zacherman, >B, a-bomb & g-girl, A. Herbert,
A. Nonny Moss, A.J. LoPresti, Aaro Viertiö, Aaron “tildesee” Friesen, Aaron
Greenspan, Aaron Hamric, Aaron Malone, Aaron Olson, Aaron Potts, Aaron Rowell,
Aaron Tudyk, Accidental Fraser, Ackinty Strappa, Adam “Woulf” Fink, Adam
Canning, Adam Chute, Adam Coleman, Adam Dray, Adam Flynn, Adam Fox, Adam
Hegemier, Adam J. Piskel, Adam Juden, Adam K, Adam Minnie, Adam Robichuad, Adam
Waggenspack, Adam Waite, Adam Wheelock Boisvert, Adam-Ross, AdamD VA, Addy,
Adreanna, Adrian Brooks, Adrian Burton, Adrian J George III, Adrian Magaña,
Adrian Price, Adrian Sotomayor, Adrienne Mueller, Al Billings, Alan Barclay,
Alan Clark, Alan De Smet, Alan Millard, Alan-Michael Havens, Alastair Bishop,
Albert Andersen, Alden and Katherine Strock, Alejandro Fernández Ortega, Alex,
Alex “Ansob” Norris, Alex Baldwin, Alex Bergquist, Alex C. Trépanier, Alex
Davies, Alex Dingle, Alex Fradera, Alex Gwilt-cox, Alex Hakobian, Alex Higdon,
Alex Hunter, Alex Mosher, Alex Nuzzi, Alex Watters, Alexander “Elric” Zorin,
Alexander Alabaster Hernandez, Alexander Cumming, Alexander Kell, Alexander
Keurvorst, Alexander Lucard, Alexander Siegelin, Alexander Wasberg, Alexandra
Hebda, Alexandre Denault, Alfred Rudzki, Alison J. Dodd, Alistair Lamb, Alphonso
Butt, Alva Hopkins, Amado Glick, amel, Amy Minucie, Anders Bohlin, Anders
Edqvist, Anders Scholl, Andre Kajita, Andrea Ungaro (Ander), Andrei Mouravski,
AndrethSaelind, Andrew, Andrew and Heleen Durston, Andrew Asplund, Andrew B.
Chason, Andrew Blake, Andrew Byers, Andrew Carbonetto, Andrew Collins, Andrew
Croftcheck, Andrew Ducker, Andrew Gatlin, Andrew Gill, Andrew Kenrick, Andrew
Knippling, Andrew Linstrom, Andrew Maizels, Andrew Medeiros, Andrew Menear,
Andrew Morton, Andrew Muttersbach, Andrew Saunders, Andrew Schubert, Andrew
Watson, Andrew Wooldridge, André Bogaz e Souza, Andrés Acevedo, Andy 'awmyhr'
MyHR, Andy Bates, Andy Blanchard, Andy Deckowitz, Andy Goldman, Andy Hsu, Andy
Kitzke, Andy Prime, Andy Smith, Anna Kruse, Anonymouse, Anthony Bucchioni,
Anthony Hersey, Anthony Martins, Anthony Popowski, Anthony Spulnik, Anton Olsen,
Antonio Merùmeni, Antonio Messaggiero, Aníbal J. Delgado, Ara, Aria H.Y. Cheng,
Ariele Agostini, Arno Ludo, Arog, Aronhiawakhon, Asher Dale, Ashley Clifton,
Ashley Raines, Atlatl Jones, Atomixwah, Aurelia Wyler, Austin Conley, Austin
Stanley, Azato, Azhrei Vep, badsmoothie, Balazs Oroszlany, Balthus Borazar,
Barac Wiley, Barry Baker, Barry C. Cook, Basil Lisk, Batman, Bay Chang, Bay
Grabowski, Beau McCarrell, Bechamolle, Ben Archer, Ben Erdin, Ben Hale, Ben
Hartzell, Ben Johnson, Ben Leftwich, Ben Mabbott, Ben Mandall, Ben Murphy, Ben
Neilsen, Ben P. Balestra, Ben Vincent, Ben Wakeland, Ben Wlodarczak, Ben Wray,
Benjamin “Bailywolf” Baugh, Benjamin Bement, Benjamin Herr, Benjamin Hinnum,
Benjamin James Meck, Bennett Smith, Bernard Gunkleman, Bert Isla, Bill
(Gryffen88) Stilson, Bill Brickman, Bill Charleroy, Bill Kokal, Bill Parrott,
Bill Valera, Billy Compton, Björn Söderström, blackcoat, Blake Hutchins,
blanksuspect, Blkct, Bo Williams, Boaz Bibi, Bob Hanks, Bob Huss, Bob Muir, Bob
Poteete, Bobby Jennings, Boon Sheridan, Boris Belitsky, bowmore, Brad, Brad
Morris, Brad Osborne, Brad Wilke, Bradford Yurkiw, braincraft, Brandon “Jabby”
Jeffries, Brandon Jordan, Brandon Landry, Brandon Perkins, Brandon Schmelz,
Brant Clabaugh, Brawley Avalon, Brendan Adkins, Brendan G Conway, Brendan Hutt,
Brendan Lew, Brendan Power, Brennan Haase, Brennan O'Brien, Brennan Taylor,
Brennen Reece, Brent Sturdevant, Bret Gillan, Brett Myers, Brian “Arkayanon”
Holder, Brian “BP” Paul, Brian “Vomax” Smith, Brian A Liberge, Brian Awis, Brian
Cooksey, Brian E. Hollenbeck, Brian Engard, Brian Gerken, Brian Leet, Brian M
McCarthy, Brian McCord, Brian Minter, Brian Sniffen, Brian Spicer, Brittany
Wong, Brooklyn Indie Games, Bruce Curd, Bryan, Bryan Meadows, Bryan P. Chavez,
Bryant Durrell, Bryant Paul Johnson, Bryce Bolliger, bsx, C. Edwards, C. W.
Marshall, Cactusse, Caleb Osborn, Caleb Van Bloem, Cam Banks, Caoimhe Ora Snow,
Carey Williams, Carl, Carl Klutzke, Carl Rigney, Carl Witty, Carolyn and Nick
Atkins, Carson Hill, casey forsberg, Casey McKenzie, Casey Walton, Cat Peters,
Catherine Hardin, Cerity Tradewind, Chad, Chad “T-Rex” Laws, Chad Bowers, Chad
J. Bowser, Chad Jemmett, Chad Reiss, Charles, Charles Alvis, Charles Long,
Charles Starr, Charlie, Charlie Reece, Cheryl Trooskin-Zoller, Children of the
Lost Eden, Chloe Katzburg, Chris A Challacombe, Chris Adams, Chris Bennett,
Chris Brooks, Chris Brua, Chris Clary, Chris Clouser, Chris Czerniak, Chris
Darden, Chris DeCarolis, Chris Fee, Chris Fowler, Chris Gardiner, Chris
Heinzmann, Chris Hopkinson, Chris Kirby, Chris Laine, Chris Lazenbatt, Chris
Longhurst, Chris Murray, Chris ONeill, Chris Parker, Chris Pullen, Chris Rogers,
Chris S, Chris Shablak, Chris Shields, Chris Slazinski, Chris Sloan, Chris
Sniezak, Chris Whetstone, Chris Wiegand, Chris Woods, Chris Yates, Christian
Abratte, Christian Griffen, Christian Leichsenring, Christian Leonhard,
christian theriault, Christof, Christoph Boeckle, Christoph Weber, Christopher
Grau, Christopher Haba, Christopher Haze, Christopher Lee, Christopher Maikisch,
Christopher MZ Sauro, Christopher Ogden, Christopher Severs, Christopher Smith,
Christopher Smith Adair, Christopher Urinko, Christopher W Mercer, Christopher
Weeks, Christopher Welch, Chuck Cooley, Civil Savage, Clint Morris, Cody “Pax”
Markle, Colin and Ian Pinkerton, Colin Booth, Colin Cherry, Colin Freeman, Colin
M, Colin Roald, Connor Alexander, Cookie Saxton-Ruiz, Corra, Count Kirith Urah
Kazar, craig guarisco, Craig Hatler, Craig Janssen, Craig McRoberts, Craig
Perko, Creature Entertainment, Cree & Richard Boyechko, Creidieki Crouch, Curran
Carmichael, Curt Meyer, Curt Steindler, Curt Thompson, Cy Myers, D. Weaver, Dag
Sverre Syrdal, Dale Horstman, Dallas McNally, Damien Holder, Damien Laing,
Damien Park, Dan Bruguier, Dan Cruickshank, Dan Grabowski, Dan Hall, Dan
Luxenberg, Dan Marchant, Dan Maruschak, Dan McSorley, Dan R., Dan Rosenthal -
Game Law Partners, Dan Shaurette, Dana B, Daniel Brannick, Daniel Brown, Daniel
Corn, Daniel Drew, Daniel G. Dyrda, Daniel H. Levine, Daniel H. Spain, Daniel
Hartnett, Daniel Hoffmann, Daniel J T Moore, Daniel J. Owsen, Daniel M. Perez,
Daniel McKenna, Daniel Morey, Daniel O'Connell, Daniel P. Shaefer, Daniel
Roanoke, Daniel Sacdpraseuth, Daniel Steadman, Daniel Westheide, Daniel, Max &
Mason, Daniele Di Rubbo, Daniele Ruggeri, Danny, Darcy, Darcy Burgess, Darin
Shepit, DarkMoonINC, Darrel, Darren Brewster, Darren Watts, Darth Butternutz,
Daryl Gubler, Dave “The Game” Chalker, Dave Bapst, Dave Campbell, Dave Kester,
Dave Rezak, Dave Ruppel, Dave Skogstad, Dave Tarr, Dave Younce, David, David
'Doc Blue' Wendt, David A. K. Lichtenstein, David A. Nixon Jr., David B, David B
Silverman, David Bolick, David Ellison, David Gallo, David Gilbert, David Hertz,
David Hines, David Kazibut, David Lai, David M., David M. Miles, David Macauley,
David Moore, David Morrison, David Murray, David P, David Ross, David Schmitt,
David Steiger, David Stoneking, David Thackaberry, David Thiel, David V Zarubin,
David Wetterbro, David Z Chen, Dean Gilbert, Dean Langford, Dean McNabb, Declan
Feeney, Deirdre Calvaneso, Demian M Walendorff, Denis Azuaje, Dennis Kadera,
Denys Mordred, Derek Cardwell, Derek Handley, Derek Lettman, Derick Larson,
desert steampunks, DeShawn Luu, Detective Clayton, Dev Purkayastha, Devin C,
Devon Campbell, Dexter Mcdot, Dick Page, Diogo Nogueira, diversionArchitect
(David C. Amarasinghe), Dominic Claveau, Don Barnett, Don Gardner, Don Schlaich,
Donald Tyo, Doug Blakeslee, Doug Bonar, Doug Daulton, Doug Hagler, Doug Pirko,
Doug Smidebush, Dougal Scott, Douglas S. Keester, Dr Ivo Robotnik, Drew
Hart-Shea, Druaightagh, Dryn, Duane Moore, Duncan Burridge, Duncan Pickard,
Dustin Gulledge, Dylan Green, Ed, Ed Casilio, Ed Kowalczewski, Ed Thater,
edchuk, Eddie Clark, Eddie Goehner, Eddy Webb, Edgar Gillock, Eduardo H
Schaeffer, Edward Damon, Edward Hand, Edward McWalters, Einar Wolfsauge, el
Mīko, Eldergamer, Eli Barnes, Eli Baskir, Elias Mulhall, Ellen Zemlin, elmitxel,
Emanuele Mandola, Emery Shier, Eoin Burke, Eon Fontes-May, Eric Coates, Eric
Duncan, Eric Haddock, Eric Heisserer, Eric J. Boyd, Eric Lytle, Eric Paquette,
Eric Stevens, Eric Stewart, Erich McNaughton, Erick Slazinski, Erik Schmidt,
Erik Tenkar, Erika Aho, Erin M. Conder, Eskimo Ace, Euan, Eusebi Vazquez, Evan
Franke, Evan Parker, Evan Silberman, Evan Torner, Everitt Long, evil bibu, Ewen
Cluney, Ezio “Aetius” Melega, Ezra Bradford, Fay Onyx, Felix Tristram, Fenway5,
Fercthu Albor, Ferïn, Filth Monkey, Fitz (GameKnightReviews.com), Flo Hoheneder,
Florian Hübner, Foreezbus, Franciolli Araújo, Francis Dickinson, Francisco
Castillo Segura, Francois Gnosis, Frank “Peach” Piechorowski, Frank B., Frank
Blazkiewicz, Frank Fiol, Frank Jarome, Franklin Kenneth Hyatt, Frans Evaldsson,
Franz Daubner, Fredrik Hansson, Fredrik Sivertsson, Fridrik Bjarnason, G.
Hartman, G.U.B.A.R. Podcast, Gabriel Johnson, Gamethyme, Garabaldi Montrosse,
Gareth DeWalt, Garou Verroq, Garrett Kelly, Garth Dighton, Garth Elliott, Gary
Arkham, Gary Beason, Gary Bradley, Gary Kacmarcik, Gaston Phillips, Gaunt,
Gauthier Descamps, Gavin Cermak, gaz moore, Geekfromtheperilousrealm.com, Gentan
Schulteis, Geo Pine, Geoff Bowers, Geoff Dash, Geoff Mochau, Geoffrey William
Kennedy, George Shanahan had no bond, Gerald, Gerolf Nikolay, Gerry Saracco,
Geza Letso, Giacomo “jackvice” Vicenzi, Gianluis Ramos, Gilbert Podell-Blume,
Giulia Barbano, Giuseppe D'Aristotile Jr., Glenn R Buettner, God, Gokce Ozan
Toptas, Gornul, Gozuja, Grandy Peace, Grant Chen, Grant Greene, Grant Lindsay,
Grat McGrat, Grayson Davis, Greg Basich, Greg Fulford, Gregor Vuga, Gregory
Heim, Gregory Parsons, Gregory Simkins, Grey Growl, Grimwade, Grinpis, GS Lamb,
Guenther Kronenberg, Guillaume “Nocker”, Guns_n_Droids, Guy Bowring, Guy
MacDonnell, Guy Sodin, H Shurmer, H. M. 'Dain' Lybarger, Hal “Venjack” Neat,
Hamish Cameron, Hans Erich Biorklund, Harold Balsac, hellium, Henning Wollny,
Henri J. Bauer, Henrik Jernstedt, Henrique Rodrigues, Henry, Henry Vogel, Henry
White, Henry Wong, Hiroki Shimizu, Hisashi, Hjortkayre, Holger Niederschulte,
Hualex, Hugh O'Connor, Hugh Pearse, Hunter W., I. Calderon, Iain McAllister,
Iain Milligan, Ian Andersen, Ian Charland, Ian Mothorp, Ian Raymond, Ian Rose,
Ian Toltz, Ian Torwick, Ian V. Caldas, Ignacio Rodríguez Chaves, Ingrid Cheung,
Irven “Myrkwell” Keppen, Isaac Ahuvia, Isaac Carr, Isaac Karth, Isaac Williams,
Ishai Barnoy, Itchetiky Jutmundus, Ivan Vaghi, J Aaron Farr, J Scag, J. Derrick
Kapchinsky, J. Myllyluoma, J. Todd Scott, J.C. Lundberg, J.O. “Volsung” Ferrer,
Jack Burnett, Jack Gibbard, Jack Gulick, Jack Hay, Jack Kenyon, Jack Miskelly,
Jack Norris, Jack Waitkus, Jackson Allen, Jacob D. Adamo, Jacob M. Moore, Jacob
Maas, Jacob Marks, Jacob Sulpice, Jaime, Jaime, Jake Cyriax, Jake E. Fitch, Jake
Parks, Jalister, James “Cornelius” Patterson, James A. English, James Brown,
James Buckingham, James Campbell, James Chilcott, James Davies, James Dillane,
James E. Winfield Jr, James Flinders, James Gabrielsen, James Jandebeur, James
Jeffers, James John, James M. Spahn, James Newman, James Oswald, James Ritter,
James Roberts, James Stuart, James Tadashi Graham, James Yasha Cunningham,
Jamie, Jamie Furtner, Jamison T Thing, Jams Mastodon, Jan Egil “Jedidiah Curzon”
Bjune, Jan Schwindowski, Jan-Yves Ruzicka, Jani Waara, Janna, Janne H. Korhonen,
Jared Hunt, Jaron Kennel, Jarrah James, Jason, Jason, Jason, Jason “Ludanto”
Smith, Jason “Zebulon” Greenwood, Jason & Kassie Hanks, Jason & Kat Romero,
Jason Buchanan, Jason Childs, Jason Dettman, Jason Flowers, Jason Grabau, Jason
Hilberdink, Jason King, Jason Kottler, Jason Leinen, Jason Morningstar & Steve
Segedy, Jason Pasch, Jason Paul McCartan, Jason Valletta, Jay Shaffstall, Jay
Steven Uy Anyong, Jays Mackie, JC Spencer, Jean-François Héon, Jeff, Jeff Bowes,
Jeff Healy, Jeff Prather, Jeff Raglin, Jeff Troutman, Jeff Vansteenkiste, Jeff
Wowkowych, Jeffrey Collyer, Jenni Higginbotham, Jens Alfke, Jered Heeschen,
Jeremiah Lee - @Trifecta_Games, Jeremiah McNichols, Jeremy Cerise, Jeremy D.
Smith (zaydoc), Jeremy Kostiew, Jeremy Puckett, Jeremy the Green Slime, Jeremy
Whalen, Jeremy Zimmerman, Jerome Grunat, Jeromy French, Jeronimo, Jerry
“DreadGazebo” LeNeave, Jerry Erica Nyssa Aeris Celes Auric Romana, Jerry L. Meyr
Jr., Jerry Sköld, Jesper Veje Walton Simonsen, Jesse Burneko, Jesse Coombs,
Jesse Kirkpatrick, Jesse Pudewell, Jessica Hammer, Jet Cyngler, Jevon, Jim &
Vicki Webster - (Ryan's parents), Jim Dagg, Jim DelRosso, Jim McGarva, Jim
Pacek, jim pinto, Jim Ryan, Jim South, Jim Sweeney, Jimmy “JR” Ray Tyner 3rd,
JMF Conklin, Joe, Joe Basham, Joe Howe, Joe LaFerlita, Joe Pruitt, Joe
Robertson, Joe Stroup, Joe Thater, Joe Thomas, Joel, joel allan, Joey Rodgers,
JoeyR, Johan Eriksson, Johannes, John “Wildunknown” James, John Aegard, John
Bogart, John Brown, John C. Schisler, John Carroll, John Coates, John Colagioia,
John Conklin, John D. Pankey, John D. Wright, John Daniels, John Earley, John
Eddy, John Fiala, John Gares Martin III, John Harris, John Ivor Carlson, John
Lammers, John Lantz, John LeBoeuf-Little, John M. Campbell, John Marron, John
Moran, John Perich, John Philip Dennis Ryan, John Powell, John Stavropoulos,
John Taber, John Thibodeau, John Ward, John Wilson, Johnn Four, Johnnie Hafley,
Johnny Bremer, Jon, Jon Cole, Jon Leitheusser, Jon Sheppard, Jon Stump, Jon
Stutzman, Jon Stutzman, Jon W. Kroeger, Jonas Möckelström, Jonas Richter, Jonas
Schiött, Jonatan Kilhamn, Jonathan “Buddha” Davis, Jonathan Bristow, Jonathan
Combs, Jonathan Ensor, Jonathan Grimm, Jonathan Grosvenor, Jonathan Ingsley,
Jonathan Jordan, Jonathan Knapp, Jonathan Lavallee, Jonathan Lee, Jonathan
Slack, Jonathan Sue, Jonathan Tiong, Jonathan Westmoreland, Jordan “xRazoo”
Jensen, Jordan Barber, Jordan Bowman, Jordan Raymond, Jorge Prieto, Jose Garcia,
Jose LaCario, Joseph Ashley, Joseph Barnsley, Joseph Meyer, Joseph Murray Jr.,
Joseph Rossi, Josh Chewning, Josh Drobina, Josh Foxford, Josh Gorfain, Josh
Lynch, Josh Miller, Josh Street, Joshua, Joshua Barney; “Qwitwa”, Joshua Card,
Joshua Krutt, Joshua Ramsey, Joshua Unruh, Joshua Wehner, José Luiz
“Tzimiscedracul” F. Cardoso, João Mariano, Juan “The Barbarian” Gonzalez, JUDD
KARLMAN! Julianna Backer, June Owatari, Justin Achilli, Justin Barr, Justin
Cranford, Justin D. Jacobson, Justin Evans, Justin Hamilton, Justin Lance,
Justin Melton, Justin S Nafziger, Justin Smith, Justin Smith, Justin Stoddard,
Justin Yeo, Justo R Diaz, K. David Woolley, Kai Yau, Kamnev Mihail, Karl Jahn,
Karl Miller, Karlen “Sorcerer of the North” Kendrick, Karoline Dianne Keeney,
Kas Anarky, kasinoki, Kastor Lieberung, Kat Land, Kate Kirby, Kayne, Keilyn
Lucent, Keith Baker, Keith Blocker, Keith Carnes, Keith Gilmour, Dave Fountain
and Doug Hare, Keith M., Keith Preston, Keith Senkowski, Keith Stetson, Kelley
Rogers, kelly j v, Ken Arthur, Ken Harward, Ken St. Andre, Kendall Shields,
Kenneth Zeranski, kensboro, Kevin Denehy, Kevin Galloway, Kevin Heckman, Kevin
Lindgren, Kevin Lorson, Kevin M. James, Kevin Martin, Kevin Maynard, Kevin
McManus, Kevin Priest, Kevin Smith, Kevin Wallace, Kevin Wilson, Kevin Young,
Kien-Peng Lim, Kierya and Mordraeth, Kim Dong-Ryul, Kirby Young, Kirin Robinson,
Kjetil Kverndokken, Klaus Weidner, Kobayashi, Konstantinos “Yo!Master” Rentas,
Kornel, Kristi Desinise, Kristian Cee, Kurt, Kurt Dietrich, Kwyndig, Kyle
Buehler, Kyle Burckhard, Kyle Payne, Kyle Rock, Kyle Simons, Kyle Waldo Torres,
Kyre, lacura17, Larry Lade, Lars Ericson, Lars Larsen, Lars M. Nielsen, Lauren
McMahon, Lavinia Fantini, LB Stouder, Lee Engelhardt, Lee Garvin, Lee Sandow,
Lee Short, Lee Zickel, Leif Erik Furmyr, Leonard Balsera, Leonardo Facchin,
Leroy Van Camp, Linda Larsson, Lior Wehrli, Lisa 'The Mouse', Little Spartan
Studios, Lizard, LogicNinja, Lond, High Mage of Virtual Cartography, Lou Hayt,
Louis Luangkesorn, Lovelydwarf, Luca Ricci, Lucas Servideo, Lukas Myhan, Lukas
Sjöström, Luke “Mournful” Jacobs, Luke Bailey, Luke Walker, M. Bair, M. Sean
Molley, M. Stevens Chase, M. W. II, Maarten Bukkems, Madeline Ferwerda,
MadRhetoric, Mads Egedal Kirchhoff, Mads Marturin, maiki, Malcolm Harbrow,
Malikor, Manohar Coussa, Manu Marron, Mar ' Iastra Yn D ' aan, Marc, Marc
'Szpil' A., Marc Hertogh, Marc Williamson, Marco “Mr. Mac” Andreetto, Marco
“Sagojo” Tripepi, Marco Bignami, Marco Brucale, Marco Costantini, Marcos Silva,
Marcus Bone, Marcus Burggraf, Marcus DLR, Marijn Cornil, Marijn Hubert, Mariko
Shewmake, Mark “Dojo” Brown, Mark Bennett, Mark Best, Mark Couture, Mark Diaz
Truman and Marissa Kelly, Magpie Games, Mark Diffenderfer, Mark E Larson, Mark
Featherston, Mark Harvey, Mark Levad, Mark Maibroda, Mark Mealman, Mark
Morrison, Mark Parker, Mark Shocklee, Mark Solino, Mark Steen, Mark, Mary,
Nathan & Hannah Watson, Markus Schoenlau, Martijn Vos, Martin Costa, Lord High
Phrenologist, Martin Griffin, Martin J. Teply, Martin Ralya, Mathias Exner,
Matias Frosterus, Matt, Matt & Nykki Boersma, Matt and Katie Johnston, Matt
Boeck, Matt Canale, Matt Clay, Matt Donaldson, Matt Downer, Matt Herson, Matt
Hogan, Matt Jackson, Matt Kimball, Matt Landis, Matt Lewis, Matt Machell, Matt
Maranda, Matt Mensch, Matt Osborne, Matt Riley, Matt Sheridan, Matt Spain, Matt
Strickling, Matt Weber, Matt Wetherbee, Matt Widmann, Matt Wilson, Matteo Sasso,
Matthew “Doc” Michnik, Matthew Ashby, Matthew Blackwell, Matthew
Broodie-Stewart, Matthew Butler, Matthew Chan, Matthew D. Gandy, Matthew Diaz,
Matthew Edwards, Matthew Gomez, Matthew Graves, Matthew Haulman, Matthew Hughes,
Matthew J. Hanson, Matthew Keevil, Matthew Krykew, Matthew L. L. Wheeler,
Matthew L. Seidl, Matthew Lind, Matthew Miller, Matthew Nielsen, Matthew
Parcell, Matthew Patterson, Matthew Rees, Matthew Rolnick, Matthew Rooks,
Matthew Uschelbec, Matthew Ward, Matthew Wilde, Matthias 'darkpact' Nagy, mau,
Maurice “gilvanblight” Tousignant, Mauro Ghibaudo, Max “Ego” Hervieux, Max
Villet, Max.A, Maynard McGuffin, MB, mcsquiggedy, Md. Muazzam B. Sham Khiruddin,
Meera Barry, Mendel Schmiedekamp, Michael, Michael “rekenner” Renneker, Michael
'Minder' Riabov, Michael Atlin, Michael Barker, Michael Bentley, Michael Bowman,
Michael Cassimaty, Michael Cule, Michael Curry, Michael D Blanchard, Michael D.
Ranalli Jr., Michael De Rosa, Michael Fake, Michael Felgenhaur, Michael
Gunderson, Michael Harrel, Michael Harrison, Michael Hertling, Michael Hill,
Michael Hughes, Michael John, Michael Kailus, Michael Lewis, Michael Llaneza,
Michael Loy, Michael Marquez, Michael Miguel-Sanchez, Michael Mitchell, Michael
Nutt, Michael Nutter, Michael R. Underwood, Michael Rees, Michael Richards,
Michael Spinks, Michael St. Clair, Michael Stephenson, Michael Swadling, Michael
the OnlineDM, Michael W. Mattei, Michael Wasserman, Michael Zautner, Michele
“Mick” Toscan, Michelle “ChessyPig” Taylor, Michelle Shepardson, Michelle,
Connor and Xander, Miguel Zapico, Mikael Andersson, Mikael Dahl, Mike & Keith
MacArthur, Mike Addison, Mike D., Mike Davey, Mike Dingeldein, Mike Edmonds,
Mike Fitch, Mike Frazer, Mike G Jones, Mike Haggett, Mike McMullan, Mike Miller,
Mike Mudgett, Mike Olson, Mike Ramsey, Mike Reed, Mike Riverso, Mike Sheley,
Mike Simpson, Mike Welker, Mikko Kurki-Suonio, Miles Gaborit, Miles Nerini,
Milton M. Fernandez, Mircea Ungureanu, MO Balbarin, Monica Speca, Monster
Johnson, Monte, Mopsothoth, Morgan Ellis, Morgan Gilbert, Morgan Hatfield,
Morgan Hay, Morgan Westbrook, morgue, Moritz, Morry Veer, Mr pLoLock, MrFatso
from GBAtemp, Murph, Myles “The Funk Wagon” McMann, Myles Corcoran, Myles
McCloskey, N. Orlando Wilson, Nachiket A. Patkar, Narayan Bajpe, Nat “woodelf”
Barmore, Nat Webb, Nate Lawrence, Nate Reed, Nathan Altice, Nathan Black, Nathan
Frund, Nathan Kangas, Nathan Malynn, Nathan Olmstead, Nathan Russell, Nathan
Trail, Nathaniel W Jordan, Ned, Neil A. Pinkerton, Neil Carr, Neil Goodridge,
Neil Gow, Neil Knauth, Nels Anderson, NerdBound Podcast, NextJenn Martin, Nic
Webb, Nice Man, Nicholas Graziade, Nicholas Hutchind, Nicholas Peterson,
Nicholas Riley, Nick “Mystic5523” Wesselmann, Nick “Necronomitron” Garcia, Nick
Bate, Nick Brooke, Nick Buddell, Nick Hrinda, Nick Pilon, Nick Townsend, Nick
Warcholak, Nick wingedferret Brown, Nicolas Acton, Nicolas G. Kruk, Nicole
Trainor, Nicolás Brian, Nightstorm, nikobe, Nikolai, Noah Hinz, Noble Kale, Noel
Hoerst, Noggin, Numinous, ObsidianBlk, OddHelge Gravalid, Odin, Oh Seung
Han(Wishsong), Ola Jostein Jørgensen, Olaf Kruse, Olav Nygård, Oliver Graf,
Oliver Northrup, Oliver Nøglebæk, Oliver von Spreckelsen, Olivier Brunet,
Olivier Vigneresse, Omer Golan-Joel, Orastes, Ovid, Ovlovian, Owen Kerr, Owen
Meldrim Moore, Oxy Morons, Pablo Iglesias Montañés, Pablo Palacios, Paolo
“vonpaulus” Castelli, Paolo “Koradji” Carnevali, Parke Hultman, Parker D Hicks,
Pat “Silverhand” Andrews, Pat Gamblin, Pat Kemp, Pat Sylves, Patrice Hédé,
Patrice Mermoud, Patricio Jones, Patrick “patmax17” Marchiodi, Patrick Clapp,
Patrick Dawson, Patrick Lee, Patrick Ley, Patrick Maguire, Patrick O'Brien,
Patrick S Malone, Patrick Sullivan, Paul, Paul “DQGM”, Paul Blair, Paul
Casagrande, Paul Cavanaugh, Paul DeMartino, Paul Edson, Paul Imboden, Paul Jenx,
Paul Mansfield, Paul R. Plaisance, Paul Smith, Paul Stefko, Paul Towler, Paul
Vogt - The Hopeless Gamer, Paul Watson, Paulo Segundo, Pedro Gómez-Esteban
González, Pedro Ziviani, Penny Greening, Perry Waterworth, Pete Falco, Pete
Figtree, Pete Griffith, Pete Hurley, Peter *LifescanX' Poulsen, Peter Alvino,
Peter Aronson, Peter Bensley, Peter Borah, Peter Goderie, Peter Kristolaitis,
Peter Schichl, Peter Usagi, Peter Wessel Zapffe, Phil “DNAphil” Vecchione, Phil
Bordelon, Phil Burge, Phil Hobson, Phil Lewis, Phil Wong, Philip Reed, Philippe
Niederkorn, Phillip Bailey, Phillip Pierce-Savoie, Pierre-Philippe, Piers, Piotr
“Ifryt” Cichy, PJ, POUDEROUX Stephane, Preston Coutts, Psyestorm, Pudge Dooley,
Péterfy Áron, QED, Quentin “Q” Hudspeth, Quinn Conklin, R. Zemlicka, R.R.
Michael Humphreys, Rachel E.S. Walton, Rachel Luxemburg, Rachelle Shelkey,
Rafael Chandler, Rafael Guillen, Rafe Ball, Rafu, Rainer Wagner-Ballner, Ralph
Mazza, Randy Mosiondz, randy vranesh, Raphael Grandsitzki, Ray Chiang, Reed
Zesiger, Remi Treuer, Renato Ramonda, Renee Knipe, Reno MWG Member Andy
Barrett-Venn, Rev. Keith Johnson, Reverance Pavane, Ricardo Tavares, Riccardo
“Hammer” Nauti, Riccardo Broccoletti, Rich Wheeler, Richard, Richard “Zelrokyz”
Moss, Richard Almaraz, Richard Collins, Richard Harrison, Richard Hirsch,
Richard J Rogers, Richard Morton, Richard Quick, Richard Sheppard, Richard T.
Balsley, Rick Ferraro, Rick Harrelson, Rick Rambo, Rikard Warvlin, Rob
'Wolfthulhu', Rob Alexander, Rob Brennan, Rob Donoghue, Rob Gruhl, Rob McCarthy,
Rob McDiarmid, Rob McNamee, Rob Sanderson (@azaroth42), Rob Tillotson, Robert
Adducci, Robert Carnel, Robert De Luna, robert lambert, Robert MacNinch, Robert
Mosley, Robert Slaughter, Robert Summerill, Roberto Collingwood, Rod B.
Spellman, Roderick Edwards, Roger N. Dominick, Ron Blessing, Ron Merideth, Ross,
Ross, Ross Cowman, Ross Hunter, Ross Lemmon, Rowan Rose Lily Hazel Middleton,
Roy from the RooSackGamers, RSC, Rudy “Chainsaw” Basso, Rudy “Hikorzik”
Rousseau, Rufo Sanchez, runester, Rustin, Rusty Larner, Rustyn Sa, Ryan & Beth
Perrin, Ryan Aech, Ryan Craig, Ryan D. Chaddick, Ryan Dunleavy, Ryan Lee, Ryan
Macklin, Ryan Moore, Ryan Olson, Ryan S., Rémi Douence, S. Miles, S. Scapicchio,
Sabe Jones, Sagi, Sam “Nightrain” Carter, Sam Anderson, Sam Chupp, Sam Courtney,
Sam Sowl, Sam Zeitlin, Samuel Briggson, Samuel Crider, Samuel Kruse, Sara
Williamson, Sarah Harper, Sarn Aska, Sascha Lecours, Sawteeth, Scientivore, Scot
Drew, Scott “The Angry DM” Rehm, Scott Belchak, Scott Bennett, Scott Boehmer,
Scott Cunningham, Scott Dierdorf, Scott Gable, Scott Kemme, Scott Kinsey, Scott
Krok, Scott Madin, Scott McGougan, Scott Neilson, Scott R. Dierks, Scott Rogers,
Scott Sutherland, Scott Taylor, Scott Underwood, Scott W. Fail, Sean, Sean
Campbell, Sean Curtin, Sean Duncan, Sean Howard, Sean Lesley, Sean Louvel, Sean
P. Kelley, Sean P. Soderlind, Sean Pollman, Sean Silva-Miramon, Sean Wills,
Seanovan, Sebastian Haaf, Sebastian Hickey, Selene Tan, Sergio Rodriguez, Seth &
Rachael Blevins, Seth A. Roby, Seth Clayton, Seth Flagg, Seth Johnson,
Sethariel, sev, Seán Harnett, Shana Rosenfeld, Shane Donohoe, Shane Kirby, Shane
Majewski, Shane Mclean, Shane Williamson knew no companions, Shannon Appelcline,
Shannon Riddle, Shari Corey, Sharkbomb Game Design Services, Shaun Hayworth,
Shawn, Shawn Fagin, Shawn Quinn, Shawn Tomkin, Shawn Tyler McCarthy, Shelton
Windham (taleswapper), Shinversus, Silvio Herrera Gea, Simon “Trooper94” Silva,
Simon Crowe, Simon Gough, Simon Paquette, Simon Sharp, Simon Weinert, Siobhan
Morris, Sion Rodriguez y Gibson, Sithilus, SJ Benoist, Soirgriffe, Sophia Lily
Alsbrooks, Spencer, Stacey Chancellor, Stefan, stefan tyler, Stefano R. Rebessi,
Steffen Vulpius, Stephan Szabo, Stephane Chopard, StephaNeil Wolfalter, Stephen
Bretall, Stephen Granade, Stephen Henderson-Grady, Stephen Holowczyk, Stephen
Parkin, Stephen Smoak, Stephen Wilcoxon, Sterling, Stern Krueger, Steve Benton,
Steve Bergeron, Steve Bode, Steve Dodge, Steve Hickey, Steve Holder, Steve
Kenson, Steve Knowlton, Steve Mains, Steve Moore, Steven Barker, Steven D
Warble, Steven Damer, Steven Grady, Steven Holst-Diemand, Steven Jarvis, Steven
K. Watkins, Steven Martindale, Steven Robert, Steven Scibetta, Steven Vest,
StingRay, Stuart Chaplin, Stuart McDermid, Sven Folkesson, Sven Hannemann, Sven
Stryker, Sławomir Wrzesień, T.S. Luikart, T.W.Wombat, Tablesaw, Tadeusz
Cantwell, TAK, Tanya Cohan-Diaz, Tapani Tiilikainen, Tas Stacey, tavernbman, Ted
Cabeen, Ted Novy, Ted Williams, teeter, Tellef, Thail, That One Die That Never
Lets You Down, The Campbells, The Daughters of Verona, The Great and Mighty Neb,
The guys at Fort Nerd, The High Lord Mhoram, of the Dark Ones, Master of the
Black Citadel, Doctrina Magicus, The Infamous P.I.G., The Lord of Lime Sherbert,
The Magus!!1!, the memory of Ada Lovelace, The Memory of Dave Arneson, The
Nashv​ille Irreg​ulars, The Secret DM, The Sutra of Supreme Excellence,
TheCatfish, Theron Teter, Thibault Mesmin d'Estienne, Thomas Foss Christensen,
Thomas Ryan, Thomas Ulricht, Thorbjørn Steen, ThorDiantral, Thriondel
Half-Elven, Tiago Marinho, Tim “Buzz” Isakson, Tim Ballew, Tim Hutchings, Tim
Knight, Tim McCracken, Timothy Sanders, TJBailey, Todd Mitchell, Todd Roy, Todd
Zircher, Tolly, Tom Cadorette, Tom Flanagan, Tom Idleman, Tom Ladegard, Tom
Lumley, Tom McCarthy, Tom Reynolds, Tomasz Pudło, Tomek Filip, Tony, Tony, Tony
Dijkstra, Tony Eng, Tony Indurante, Tony Love, Tony Reyes, Topi Makkonen,
Torolf, Trachalio, Tracy Barnett/Sand & Steam Productions, Tracy Hurley, Travis
Bryant, Travis Scott, Trent Casey, Trent Yacuk, Trevis Martin, Trey Mercer,
Trollhawke, Troy “Wrongtown” Hall, Troy Gilbert, Troy M. Costisick, Tuomas,
Turk, txelu, Ty Sawyer, Tyler Jones, Tyler Lanser, Uffe Thorsen, Ulysses,
Umberto Pignatelli, Unisprink, Vacuumjockey, Vera Vartanian, Vernon Lingley,
Veronica Courage Wakefield, Victor Lane, Victor Maslov, Victor Wyatt, Victoria
Uney, Viktor Haag, Ville Halonen, Vinicius Lessa, Vites, Vlad Del Cid, Vladimir
Dzundza, Vladimir Filipović, W. Scott Jones, Wade “Belzain” Ussery, Walt
Robillard, Warrbo, Warren “Mook” Wilson, Warren Merrifield, Wayne “Lumrunner”
Humfleet, Wayne Arthurton, Wayne Lauer, Wei-Hua, Hsieh, Wes Price, Weston
Clowney, White Paws, Whitt, Wilhelm Fitzpatrick, Will Ijebor, Will Robot, Will
Thibault, Will Vesely, William “CallMeWilliam” Nichols, William Ansell, William
Carroll, William Fischer, William Gerke, William K Wood, William Koch, Willis
Scilacci, Wing Chan, WJO III, Wojciech Gębczyk, Wolfberry, WOoDY, Wothbora,
wraith808, Wyatt Camp, Xander Veerhoff, Xavier Aubuchon-Mendoza, Xellos, cleric
of coins, xiangh, Yan Prado, Yoki Erdtman, Yragael, Z. Dettwyler, Zach Clay,
Zach Gourley, Zach Peters, Zachary Hall, Zachary Sylvain, Zachary Williams, Zack
Kline, Zack Woodard, Zane Ewers, zero.executioner, Zippy Schindler, Zontco
Gaming Division, ZSP, östen petersson.
* Teaching the Game
Since you’ve read this book it’s likely at some point you’ll be teaching the
game to others, either experienced roleplayers or those new to the hobby.
Throughout the design process we’ve had many chances to play with lots of
different gamers from different backgrounds and there are a few things we’ve
found work well for teaching the game.
** Pitch It
Before you play you’ll likely be explaining the game to your new players (don’t
just spring it on them, that’s not cool). We call that the pitch: it’s
explaining why you want to play Dungeon World and why you think they’ll like it.

First and most importantly: put it in your own words. We can’t give you a script
because the best way to get people excited about the game is to share your
honest excitement. There are, however, some things you might want to touch on.

With first-time roleplayers it’s best to focus on what roleplaying means in
Dungeon World. Tell them what they’ll be doing (portraying a character) and what
you’ll be doing (portraying the world around them). Mention the general conceit
(adventurers and adventure). It’s usually a good idea to mention the role of the
rules too, how they’re there to drive the action forward in interesting ways.

With folks who’ve played RPGs before, especially those who’ve played other
fantasy adventure games, you can focus more on what makes Dungeon World
different from other similar games. Ease-of-play, the way the rules just step in
at the right times, and the fast pace are all things that experienced
roleplayers often appreciate.

No matter the audience, don’t just pitch Dungeon World, pitch the game you’re
going to run. If this is going to be a trip into the city sewers, tell them that
right up front. If there’s an evil cult to be stopped that should be part of
your description. The interaction between you, the players, and the rules will
create all kinds of interesting secrets later on; your pitch should honestly
portray the game you intend to run.
** Present the Classes
Once everybody’s on board for a game of Dungeon World and you’ve sat down to
play start by presenting the character sheets. Give a short description of each,
making sure to mention what each does and their place in the world. You can also
read out the descriptions for each class, those all include something about both
what the class does and how that fits into the big picture.

If anybody has questions about the rules, answer them, but for now focus on
describing what the classes do in plain terms. If someone asks about the fighter
it’s more useful to tell them that the fighter has a signature weapon that’s one
of a kind then to go into detail about how the signature weapon move works.
** Create Characters
Go through the character creation rules step by step. The process of creating a
character is also a great introduction to the basic concepts: the players will
encounter stats, moves, HP, and damage all in an order that makes sense. Don’t
bother trying to frontload the rules explanations. There aren’t really any wrong
choices.

Each player will encounter the rules that are important to their class. The
fighter, for example, will see moves about weapon ranges and piercing and ask
about them, explain them as needed. If the fighter player doesn’t ask you what
piercing is, don’t worry about it. They’re happy to choose based on the fiction,
which is all the stats and tags reflect anyway.

If your players are particularly worried about making their characters “right”
just give them the option of changing them later. Trying to cover every rule and
give them all the context now will just slow the game down. In particular, don’t
go over the basic moves in detail yet. Leave them out so that the players can
read them and ask questions, but don’t waste time by explaining each. They’ll
come up as needed.

As the players introduce their characters and start setting bonds move from
answering questions to asking them. Ask about why they chose what they did and
what that means for their character. Ask about details established by their
bonds. Let their choices establish the world around them. Take special note of
anything that you think you might be able to make moves with (like an estranged
teacher or a simmering war).
*** Start Play
Start play by concretely describing the world around them. Keep it brief and
evocative, use plenty of details, and end with something that demands action.
Then ask them what they do.

Ending with something that demands action is important. Don’t presume that new
players will already know what they want to do. Giving them something to react
to right away means you get straight to playing.

Especially for new players make sure that the action they’re thrown into is
something they have the tools to deal with. A fight is a good choice, as is a
tense negotiation (which can easily become a fight). Keep it simple and let the
complexity build.

Even in a fight keep to simple monsters: things that bleed, don’t have too much
armor, and don’t have piercing. Give them a chance to get used to their armor
and dealing damage before you start using the exceptions to those rules, like
piercing and ignoring armor. Of course if the fiction dictates ignoring armor or
piercing or a certain monster, use it, but don’t lead with those.

For new players make liberal use of your Show Signs of an Approaching Threat
move. New players, or those used to a different type of fantasy adventure, may
have different assumptions about what’s lethal and when they’re in danger, so
make sure to show them danger clearly. Once they’ve started to pick up on what’s
dangerous you can give them a little less warning.

If you’re GMing for the first time focus on a few moves: Show Signs of an
Approaching Threat, Deal Damage, Put Someone in a Spot. Only look at your moves
sheet if you’re pretty sure none of those three apply. Eventually you’ll build
up familiarity with the whole range of GM moves and using them will seem like
second nature.
*** Continuing Play
After an hour or two of play the players will likely have everything down. As a
first time GM you may take a bit longer to pick up all your moves, maybe a
session or two. Just roll with it.

If you find yourself struggling in the first session consider it a pilot, like
the first episode of a TV show. Feel free to start over or retroactively change
things. If a player decides that the thief just isn’t what they thought it was
let them switch classes (either remaking the same character or introducing
someone new). If your first adventure wasn’t working too well scrap it and start
something new.

While Dungeon World works great for one-shots the longer cycles of levels and
bonds don’t really kick in for a bit. If your first one or two sessions go well
consider scheduling out enough time for 5–10 more. Knowing that you’re planning
to play that much longer gives you some space to plan out your fronts and
resolve them.
* Adventure Conversion
There isn’t always time for prep. People aren’t entirely committed to a game—you
just want to test it out or you’ve got a four-hour slot at a convention that you
want to fill and you’ve never met the players before in your life. Maybe prep
isn’t something you care about or you think it’s more fun to just take a map and
run with it. Even better, maybe you’ve got a favorite old school adventure
module and you’d love to run through using the Dungeon World rules. In this
appendix, we’ll cover how to convert and adapt material from other games into
Dungeon World and give you the same flexibility to run your favorite adventures
using the rules in this book.
** Overview
The first step in preparing an adventure for use with Dungeon World is reading
through that adventure, and through the Dungeon World rules. For this book,
you’ll want to be familiar with all the basic rules, as well as familiar with
the section on fronts and on the GM principles. The former will be guiding you
in adapting the framework of the adventure and the latter will help keep your
mind going in the right direction—so that gameplay stays true to the style and
rules set out in this book. You’ll want to read through the module next, paying
close attention to the four following topics as you go.
    - Maps
    - Monsters
    - Magic Items
    - NPCs and Organizations

Flip through the adventure, make some notes as you go, but don’t feel you need
to memorize the whole thing. Areas that focus particularly on statistics are
likely to end up ignored, and you’ll want to leave blanks in the adventure for
you and the players to discover as you go.

When you’ve finished, you’ll have a broad understanding about what the adventure
is about—the power groups at play in it, the special or cool monsters the
adventure contains, the threats and dangers that its cast present to the world
and the kinds of things the PCs might be interested in. Set aside the adventure
for now, and refer to the fronts section of Dungeon World. This is where the
majority of your work is going to take place.
** Fronts
The core of any standard adventure, scenario or game session in Dungeon World
flows outward from the fronts to the players; the fronts have their impending
dooms, the players react, and in the space between, you play the game to find
out what happens. The same is true when presenting a converted adventure.
Reading through the module, you’ll have noticed things—NPCs, places of interest,
special monsters and organizations that might have an impact on the world or
some agenda to carry out. Depending on the size of the adventure, there may be
just one or a few of these. Take a look through the list of front types and
create one for each group.
I’m going to convert an old adventure I love; I’ve run it a dozen times in a
bunch of different systems and I think it’d be a blast to run my Dungeon World
group through. I’ve given myself a quick read through to remind myself what the
adventure is all about. In this case, there’s a town being menaced in secret by
a wicked cult who worships a squamous reptile god. Sounds like fun! The
adventure has a secret dungeon, a corrupt religious order, a bunch of smelly
troglodytes and, because the whole town is a mess of suspicion and
finger-pointing, some very helpless adventurers. It’s a pretty grim start with
lots of bad things to choose from. I’ve decided that all that bad stuff falls
under two main fronts: The Cultists and The Troglodyte Clan.
Now, I could make the sorcerous naga that lives in the caverns her own front, if
I wanted to, or I could add in a campaign front for the Reptile God itself, but
I think I’ll only be running this game a few sessions, so I’m going to stay
focused. The two fronts I have work together in some ways, but are unique and
operate independently, so I’ve separated them.
Create these fronts like you would normally, choosing dangers, impending dooms,
and grim portents. Ask one or two stakes questions but be sure to leave yourself
lots of room—that’s where you can really tie in the characters. Normally, you’d
be pulling these things straight out of the inspiration of your brain, but in
this case, you’ve got the module to guide you. Think about the fronts as themes,
and the dangers as elements from the pages of your module. Look at the kinds of
things your fronts are said to be doing in the adventure and how that might go
if the PCs were never there to stop it. What’s the worst that could happen if
the fronts were able to run rampant? This kind of reading-between-the-lines will
give you ammunition for making your hard moves as you play through the
adventure. This step is where you’ll turn those stat-block NPCs into either
full-fledged dangers themselves, or members of the front’s cast.

If there are any traps, curses or general effects in the adventure you’d like to
write custom moves for, do it now. A lot of old adventures will have elements
that call for a “saving throw” to avoid some noisome effect—these can often
simply be a cause for a defy danger roll, or can have whole, separate custom
moves if necessary. The key here is to capture the intent of the adventure—the
spirit of the thing—rather than translate some mechanical element perfectly.

When you’re done, you’ll have a set of fronts that cover the major threats and
dangers the characters will face.
** Monsters
Most published adventures contained one or two unique monsters not seen anywhere
else—custom creatures and denizens of the deeps that could threaten players in
some way they hadn’t encountered before. Take a look through the adventure and
make sure you’ve caught them all. Many monsters will already have statistics
noted in Dungeon World and you can, if you’re happy with them, just make a note
of what page they’re on in your fronts and move on from there. If you want to
further customize the monsters, or need to create your own, use the rules to do
so. In this step, try to avoid thinking about “balancing” the monsters or
concerning yourself too much with how many HP a monster has or whether its armor
rating matches what you expect. Think more about how the monster is meant to
participate in the world. Does it scare off hopeless adventurers? Is it there to
bar their way or pose a riddle? What is its purpose in the greater ecology of
the dungeon or adventure at large? Translating the spirit of the thing will
always give you better, more engaging results. If the monster has a cool power
or neat trick you want to write a custom move for, do so! Custom moves are what
make Dungeon World feel unique from group to group, so take advantage of them
where you can.
In my adventure, the monsters run the gamut. I’ve got a scary naga with some
mind-controlling powers, an evil priest with divine snake-god magic, a bunch of
ruffian cultists, a dragon turtle and a few miscellaneous lizards, crocodiles
and snakes. Most of these I can pull from the monster settings, but I’ll create
custom stats for the naga and the cultist leader, at least. I want them to feel
new and different and have some cool ideas for how that might look. I use the
monster creation rules to put them together.
*** Direct Conversion
If you run across a monster that you haven’t already created and which you don’t
know well enough to convert using the monster creation rules you can instead
convert them directly.
**** Damage
If the monster’s damage is a single die with a bonus of up to +10 keep it as-is.
If the monster’s damage uses multiple dice of the same size roll the listed dice
and take the highest result. If the monster uses multiple dice of different
sizes roll only the largest and take the highest result.
**** HP
If the monster’s HP is listed as Hit Dice take the maximum value of the first HD
and add one for each additional hit dice. If the monster’s HP is listed as a
number with no Hit Dice divide the HP by 4.
**** Armor
If the monster’s AC is average give it 1 armor. If the monster’s AC is low, give
it 0 armor. If the monster’s AC is high give it 2 armor, 3 armor for beasts that
are all about defense. If it’s nearly invulnerable, 4 armor. +1 armor if its
defenses are magical.
**** Moves and Instinct
Look at the special abilities or attacks listed for the monster, these form the
basis for its moves.
** Maps
One of the biggest differences between Dungeon World and many other fantasy RPGs
is the concept of maps and mapping. In many games, you’ll see a square-by-square
map denoting precisely what goes where, often presented to give as much detail
as possible and leave little to the imagination save the description of the
location in question. Dungeon World often leans the opposite direction—maps
marked with empty space and a one or two word description like “blades” or
“scary.” To adapt an existing adventure for use in Dungeon World, simply keep in
mind your principles and agenda. Primarily, keep in mind that as the GM, it’s
your job to “draw maps, leave blanks” and to “ask questions and use the
answers.”

To that end, it’s often best to re-draw the map entirely, if you have time.
Don’t copy it inch-by-inch but redraw it freehand, leaving spaces and drawing
out new rooms, if you’d like. Don’t stick to the map exactly as written, but
give yourself some creative license. The idea here is to give yourself room to
expand—to allow the players’ reaction to the adventure to surprise and inspire
you. If you’ve got the whole map nailed down in advance, there’s nowhere to go
you don’t already know about, is there? Pick a few rooms that don’t interest you
and wipe out their inhabitants. Draw a new tunnel or two. This will give you
some space to play around once you get into the game itself.

If you don’t have the time or inclination to re-draw the map, don’t worry. Just
take the original map, make a few notes about what might go where and leave the
rest blank. When the players go into that room marked “4f” don’t look it up,
just make a guess at what might be there based on your notes and what else has
been happening. You’ll find a comfortable balance between freely playing out
what happens and consulting your prep as you go along.
The maps that come with my adventure are a good mix of fun and cool and sort of
boring fluff. I’ll keep most of what the dungeon describes under the city—the
lair of the troglodytes and the secret caves where the captive villagers are
being kept—but I’m going to throw away a lot of the stuff about the village
itself and just leave blank spaces. It’ll give me room to use the answers to
questions like “Who do you already know, here?” and “Who lives in the abandoned
hut up the road?” I’ve made some notes about where the map and my fronts
intersect, but mostly I’ve just given myself room to explore.
** Magic & Treasure
Two things that are, traditionally, a “big deal” in published modules are
treasure and magic items. This is less relevant in Dungeon World (as the reward
cycle for characters is more about “doing” than about “having”) but it’s still
fun to drudge through a dungeon or explore lost ruins and come up with cool
magic items and piles of gold! Like the map, it’s useful to get an idea of the
kinds of stuff that might be found in the adventure—anything particularly called
out in the text as relevant to the adventure itself (a magic sword that can be
used to wound the golem on level 4, or a pendant belonging to the prince
captured in room 3) is particularly important. Like monsters, it’s better to
look at magic items in terms of what purpose they fulfill: what they’re “for”
rather than the damage or armor bonus they might give. Dungeon World isn’t built
on balancing treasure against character level, for example, so just look through
the adventure for items that seem cool or fun or interesting and create new
magic items (with custom moves as necessary) wherever you think it’s needed.
This is possibly the easiest step of conversion. Again, you can leave yourself
exploratory room, here. Make notes to yourself like “The wizard has a magic
staff, what does it do?” and find that out in play. Ask the players about it,
see what they have to say. Let spout lore do some work for you. “You’ve heard
that the wizard here has a strange magical staff. What rumors have you heard of
its origins?”
** Introductory Moves
This step is entirely optional, but can be really useful when running through an
adventure for a convention group or other group where running through a full
“first session” process just isn’t possible. You can take variables of the
adventure and create “hooks” for that adventure, writing custom moves to be made
after character creation but before play starts. These moves will serve to
engage the characters in the fiction and give them something special to prepare
them or hook them into what’s about to happen. You can write one for each class,
or bundle them together, if you like. Here’s an example:
Fighter, someone who loves you gave you a gift before you left for a life of
adventure. Roll+CHA and tell us how much they love you. On a 10+ pick two
heirlooms, on a 7-9 pick one. On a miss, well, good intentions count for
something, right?
    - A vial of antivenom
    - A shield that glows with silver light
    - A rusted old key in the shape of a lizard
These sorts of moves can give the players the sense that their characters are
tied to the situation at hand, and open the door for more lines of
question-and-answer play that can fill the game world with life. Think about the
fronts, the things they endanger, the riches they might protect and their impact
on the world. Let these intro moves flow from that understanding, creating a
great kickstart to the adventure.
* Instant NPCs
Sometimes the players will come across someone who becomes important in the
moment. When the ritual goes wrong and a poor captive gets the power cosmic what
does that villager do with it? Who were they?

When you need a quick NPC all you need is an instinct and some way to pursue it.
We call that a knack, it can be anything from a skill to a title to a debt owed.
Combine the two and you have an NPC who has something they want and a way to try
to get it—you’re ready to go.
** 100 Instincts
    1. To avenge
    2. To spread the good word
    3. To reunite with a loved one
    4. To make money
    5. To make amends
    6. To explore a mysterious place
    7. To uncover a hidden truth
    8. To locate a lost thing
    9. To kill a hated foe
    10. To conquer a faraway land
    11. To cure an illness
    12. To craft a masterwork
    13. To survive just one more day
    14. To earn affection
    15. To prove a point
    16. To be smarter, faster and stronger
    17. To heal an old wound
    18. To extinguish an evil forever
    19. To hide from a shameful fact
    20. To evangelize
    21. To spread suffering
    22. To prove worth
    23. To rise in rank
    24. To be praised
    25. To discover the truth
    26. To make good on a bet
    27. To get out of an obligation
    28. To convince someone to do their dirty work
    29. To steal something valuable
    30. To overcome a bad habit
    31. To commit an atrocity
    32. To earn renown
    33. To accumulate power
    34. To save someone from a monstrosity
    35. To teach
    36. To settle down
    37. To get just one more haul
    38. To preserve the law
    39. To discover
    40. To devour
    41. To restore the family name
    42. To live a quiet life
    43. To help others
    44. To atone
    45. To prove their worth
    46. To gain honor
    47. To expand their land
    48. To gain a title
    49. To retreat from society
    50. To escape
    51. To party
    52. To return home
    53. To serve
    54. To reclaim what was taken
    55. To do what must be done
    56. To be a champion
    57. To avoid notice
    58. To help a family member
    59. To perfect a skill
    60. To travel
    61. To overcome a disadvantage
    62. To play the game
    63. To establish a dynasty
    64. To improve the realm
    65. To retire
    66. To recover a lost memory
    67. To battle
    68. To become a terror to criminals
    69. To raise dragons
    70. To live up to expectations
    71. To become someone else
    72. To do what can’t be done
    73. To be remembered in song
    74. To be forgotten
    75. To find true love
    76. To lose their mind
    77. To indulge
    78. To make the best of it
    79. To find the one
    80. To destroy an artifact
    81. To show them all
    82. To bring about unending summer
    83. To fly
    84. To find the six-fingered man
    85. To wake the ancient sleepers
    86. To entertain
    87. To follow an order
    88. To die gloriously
    89. To be careful
    90. To show kindness
    91. To not screw it all up
    92. To uncover the past
    93. To go where no man has gone before
    94. To do good
    95. To become a beast
    96. To spill blood
    97. To live forever
    98. To hunt the most dangerous game
    99. To hate
    100. To run away
** 100 Knacks
    1. Criminal connections
    2. Muscle
    3. Skill with a specific weapon
    4. Hedge wizardry
    5. Comprehensive local knowledge
    6. Noble blood
    7. A one-of-a-kind item
    8. Special destiny
    9. Unique perspective
    10. Hidden knowledge
    11. Magical awareness
    12. Abnormal parentage
    13. Political leverage
    14. A tie to a monster
    15. A secret
    16. True love
    17. An innocent heart
    18. A plan for the perfect crime
    19. A one-way ticket to paradise
    20. A mysterious ore
    21. Money, money, money
    22. Divine blessing
    23. Immunity from the law
    24. Prophecy
    25. Secret martial arts techniques
    26. A ring of power
    27. A much-needed bag of taters
    28. A heart
    29. A fortified position
    30. Lawmaking
    31. Tongues
    32. A discerning eye
    33. Endurance
    34. A safe place
    35. Visions
    36. A beautiful mind
    37. A clear voice
    38. Stunning looks
    39. A catchy tune
    40. Invention
    41. Baking
    42. Brewing
    43. Smelting
    44. Woodworking
    45. Writing
    46. Immunity to fire
    47. Cooking
    48. Storytelling
    49. Ratcatching
    50. Lying
    51. Utter unremarkableness
    52. Mind-bending sexiness
    53. Undefinable coolness
    54. A way with knots
    55. Wheels of polished steel
    56. A magic carpet
    57. Endless ideas
    58. Persistence
    59. A stockpile of food
    60. A hidden path
    61. Piety
    62. Resistance to disease
    63. A library
    64. A silver tongue
    65. Bloodline
    66. An innate spell
    67. Balance
    68. Souls
    69. Speed
    70. A sense of right and wrong
    71. Certainty
    72. An eye for detail
    73. Heroic self-sacrifice
    74. Sense of direction
    75. A big idea
    76. A hidden entrance to the city
    77. The love of someone powerful
    78. Unquestioning loyalty
    79. Exotic fruit
    80. Poison
    81. Perfect memory
    82. The language of birds
    83. A key to an important door
    84. Metalworking
    85. Mysterious benefactors
    86. Steely nerves
    87. Bluffing
    88. A trained wolf
    89. A long-lost sibling, regained
    90. An arrow with your name on it
    91. A true name
    92. Luck
    93. The attention of supernatural powers
    94. Kindness
    95. Strange tattoos
    96. A majestic beard
    97. A book in a strange language
    98. Power overwhelming
    99. Delusions of grandeur
    100. The wind at his back and a spring in his step
** Names
Finbar, Hywn, One Eye, Alhoro, Arlon, Yev, Slime, Jocat, Ewing, Lim, Poy, Milo,
Deryl, Medlyn, Astrafel, Daelwyn, Feliana, Damarra, Sistranalle, Pendrell,
Melliandre, Dagoliir, Baldric, Leena, Dunwick, Willem, Edwyn, Florian,
Seraphine, Quorra, Charlotte, Lily, Ramonde, Cassandra, Durga, Aelfar, Gerda,
Rurgosh, Bjorn, Drummond, Helga, Siggrun, Freya, Wesley, Brinton, Jon, Sara,
Hawthorn, Elise, Clarke, Lenore, Piotr, Dahlia, Carmine, Hycorax, Ethanwe,
Sinathel, Demanor, Menoliir, Mithralan, Taeros, Aegor, Tanner, Dunstan, Rose,
Ivy, Robard, Mab, Thistle, Puck, Anne, Serah, Elana, Obelis, Herran, Syla,
Andanna, Siobhan, Aziz, Pelin, Sibel, Nils, Wei, Ozruk, Surtur, Brunhilda,
Annika, Janos, Greta, Dim, Rundrig, Jarl, Xotoq, Elohiir, Sharaseth, Hasrith,
Shevaral, Cadeus, Eldar, Kithracet, Thelian, Finnegan, Olive, Randolph,
Bartleby, Aubrey, Baldwin, Becca, Hawke, Rudiger, Gregor, Brianne, Walton
* Example of Play
I’m GMing a game with Isaac (playing Omar), Ben (playing Brianne), Amy (playing
Nora), and Dan (playing Rath). The group has come upon a tribe of goblins
preparing the ritual sacrifice of a rare and valuable albino crocodile (highly
regarded as pets among the wealthy of the city).

Three of the goblin warriors—drugged on narcotic vapors—charge the fighter
Brianne, shrieking. Two others take cover, prepare their bows and gesture
urgently toward Rath, as they make signs to ward off the evil eye. Another group
of three slips into the shadows around the outer edge of the chamber, preparing
a sneak attack. The high priest and her acolyte carry on with the ritual,
rubbing the croc’s upturned belly to keep it compliant, and bringing out the
sacred knife to slit its throat.

Once I describe the situation I make sure the game’s a conversation by giving
them a chance to do something: “So, what do you do?”

Isaac jumps into the action first. “There’s enough shadows at the edges of the
chamber to hide in?” “Yeah,” I say, “the goblins aren’t much for lighting
apparently. The edges of the chamber just kind of disappear into crumbling
walls, rubble, and gloom.” “Great! I’m going over here, the side where the
sneaky ones went. Omar glances over his shoulders, pulls up his hood over his
head, and ducks into the shadows. I’m going to pop out of the shadows right
here, where the torches illuminate the sacrificial altar.”

I look over the map and say “Well, there’s certainly a danger of being
discovered that I think you’re defying. Sounds like Dex to me, since you’re
moving carefully and silently,” so he picks up the dice and rolls. The dice show
1 and 2, plus his Dex of 2 is only 5. “Damn!” he says.

I already have an idea of what to do, but I check it against my list of moves to
be sure. Sure enough, my idea to have him get his foot lodged in the rubble in
the darkness is a move, “put someone in a spot.” “As you make your way through
the shadows, you put your foot down on some rubble and it shifts under you,
pinning your foot. What’s worse, you hear a deep raspy breath as the shifting
rubble awakes something in the shadows. Are you giving away your position to cry
for help or trying to get out yourself?”

“Um, I’m not sure.”

“That’s fine, we’ll come back to you. What are the rest of you doing?”

Dan steps up. “Those goblins that ducked into the shadows? Can I see them?” “Not
at first glance. Are you trying to pick them out?” “No, I’m just wondering if
they’ll be targets for my sleep spell. I push the winds of magic into a lulling
summer breeze that fills the room.”

Dan rolls his cast a spell move to cast Sleep. He rolls 6 total on the dice, and
he has +2 Int, for a total of 8. He has a choice to make. “You can feel the
spell slipping away from you, the winds of magic are already all caught up in
the goblin’s ritual sacrifice. There are some options on the move, which one are
you taking to keep the spell?”

Dan ponders his options. “I may need to put more of these guys to sleep.
Brianne, can you cover me if I get in trouble or should I take the -1 forward?”

“Sure, I can cover you,” Ben says.

“Okay, I’ll take the danger option.”

“Great,” I say. “The narcotic vapors those goblins are on? It attunes their
senses: They can feel the winds of magic just a bit, and now they’re all running
at you instead of Brianne. How many creatures are you putting to sleep?”

Dan rolls the die. “Looks like only 1, damn.”

“Right in the middle of some long goblin invocation the priest just drops to the
floor. Her acolyte immediately starts shaking her to wake her up. Neither of
them is paying much attention to the albino crocodile, which is no longer
content since no one is rubbing its belly. The goblins on the fumes, though,
they’re coming right at Rath.”

Ben jumps in. “I step between Rath and the crazed goblins and make myself a big
target, drawing the goblin’s attention with a yell.”

“Sounds like defend,” I say.

“Okay, I rolled a 7, so I hold 1.”

“Great. The three goblins on fumes practically bowl Rath over as they slam into
him, swinging their daggers wildly.”

“No they don’t!” Ben says. “I spend my hold to get into the way and direct the
attack to me.”

“So Brianne steps in at the last moment, pushes Rath out of the way, and the
goblins lay into her instead. Looks like 5 damage. Nora, Brianne’s got these
three psychotic goblins all over her, Rath’s just put the priestess to sleep,
the crocodile’s stirring, and Omar’s nowhere to be found. What are you doing?”

“First I line up a shot on one of the archer goblins, and while I’m doing that I
give a little head nod and Canto heads off into the shadows, he’s trained to
hunt, he’s looking for Omar to make sure he’s all right.”

I look over the ranger’s command move, to make sure I know what the effects of
Canto’s search are, before responding. “Well, on his own Canto will probably
find Omar in a while. If you go into the darkness with him you’ll take his bonus
to your discern realities roll to find Omar. But first it sounds like you’re
making a called shot?”

“Oh, the goblin archers are surprised by me? I thought I was just volleying,”
Amy replies.

It’s time for me to make a call. “No, they’re entirely focused on Rath, they’re
about to fire on him. I think you’ve got the element of surprise because they’re
just too focused.”

“Great! Then I’ll go ahead and take a shot at the arms of the one closest to me,
I want him to drop his bow. Looks like that’s +Dex… 10! He drops his bow and
takes 4 damage.”

I consult the goblin’s stats first, then reply “Yup, that’ll kill him. And since
you hit him dead in the arm, he doesn’t get a shot off. The other one, however,
releases his shot at Rath, for 2 damage. Rath, Brianne pushes you out of the way
and you think you’re safe for a split second before an arrow flies into your
leg, what are you doing about it? Actually, hold that thought, let’s see what
Omar’s doing.”

Isaac’s had some time to think things through now. “This deep raspy breath, can
I make out where it’s coming from? Is it like a human-sized rasp or a
monster-sized rasp?”

“Sounds to me like you’re trying to listen to your senses and get some
information.” I’m hoping that this will remind Isaac there’s a move for this,
instead of just telling him to make the move.

“Oh yeah! So I’m discerning realities, staying as quiet as I can and just trying
to pick up any detail on what this thing is. With my Wisdom that’s a 7, whew.
What should I be on the lookout for?”

I take a second to look over my notes and the map, just to make sure I give him
all the information. “Well, not the goblins, actually. They pass by, closer to
the light then you, intent on backstabbing your friends and not noticing you.
The thing that you do see is the tip of this huge crocodile snout peak over a
mound of rubble, with that rasping sound coming from it. It looks like the
albino crocodile has family, and it’s big, horse-sized. If you make noise by
moving rocks and getting unstuck it’ll almost certainly hear you. What are you
doing about that?”

Isaac ponders. “So, I can try to get out of here, defying danger most likely
from the sounds of it. Or… I tear off a piece of my cloak and soak it in an
entire dose of my goldenroot poison. It’s an applied poison, but if I can get
this huge crocodile to swallow it before it swallows me it’ll treat me as a
trusted ally, and then I can use it against the goblins.”

“Okay!” That sounds like a risky plan to me, but it’s just crazy enough to work.
Time to cut back to someone else. “Omar’s soaking poison into a scrap of cloak,
Brianne’s got three drugged-up goblins scraping at her, Nora’s got an eye out
for Omar, there are goblin sneaks in the shadows, one goblin archer by the
altar, the crocodile is waking up, and Rath just took an arrow to the knee.
Whew. Rath, what are you doing about that arrow?”

* Basic Moves
This chapter contains the moves that are available to all characters. These
moves fall into two categories: basic and special.

Basic moves are the bread and butter of the adventurer’s life. They cover
situations likely to come up in fights, tense negotiations, and dangerous areas.

Special moves come up a little more rarely. They cover things like gaining a
level, taking a long journey, or returning to town between adventures.

All player characters have all the basic and special moves. Each player
character will also have some moves from their class—we’ll get to those later.

Each move is presented here starting with its name, then the rules of the move.
Some are also accompanied by a quick discussion of how to use the move and some
examples of the move being used in play.
** Hack and Slash
When you attack an enemy in melee, roll+Str. ✴On a 10+, you deal your damage to
the enemy and avoid their attack. At your option, you may choose to do +1d6
damage but expose yourself to the enemy’s attack. ✴On a 7–9, you deal your
damage to the enemy and the enemy makes an attack against you.
Hack and slash is for attacking a prepared enemy plain and simple. If the enemy
isn’t prepared for your attack—if they don’t know you’re there or they’re
restrained and helpless—then that’s not hack and slash. You just deal your
damage or murder them outright, depending on the situation. Nasty stuff.

The enemy’s counterattack can be any GM move made directly with that creature. A
goblin might just attack you back, or they might jam a poisoned needle into your
veins. Life’s tough, isn’t it?

Note that an “attack” is some action that a player undertakes that has a chance
of causing physical harm to someone else. Attacking a dragon with inch-thick
metal scales full of magical energy using a typical sword is like swinging a
meat cleaver at a tank: it just isn’t going to cause any harm, so hack and slash
doesn’t apply. Note that circumstances can change that: if you’re in a position
to stab the dragon on its soft underbelly (good luck with getting there) it
could hurt, so it’s an attack.

If the action that triggers the move could reasonably hurt multiple targets roll
once and apply damage to each target (they each get their armor).

Some attacks may have additional effects depending on the triggering action, the
circumstances, or the weapons involved. An attack could also knock someone down,
restrain them, or leave a big bloody splatter.
GM: Jarl, you’re up to your not-inconsiderable belly in slavering goblins. They
have you surrounded, knives bared. What do you do?
Jarl: I’ve had enough of this! I wallop the closest goblin with my hammer.
GM: Okay, then. This is definitely combat, you’re using hack and slash.
Roll+Str.
Jarl: I got an 11. It says here that I have a choice. Fear is for the weak, let
those goblins come!
GM: You smash your hammer into the nearest goblin and are rewarded by the
satisfying sound of the crunching of his bones. That and a knife wound as the
goblin counterattacks. He deals 4 damage to you. What do you do?
GM: Cadeus, from the shadows, you’ve got the drop on those orc warriors.
Cadeus: I leap out and bring my sword down in a sweeping arc! Like this! Yeeeah!
GM: Well, they weren’t expecting that, they’re caught totally off guard and you
slice into one. Roll damage.
Cadeus: I deal 6 damage.
GM: The orc collapses in a bloody heap! The second orc freezes and then he’s
grinning at you with that horrible tusked mouth, raising his signal horn from
his belt! What do you do?
GM: Bartleby, you’ve got Finbar the Magnificent, mightiest duelist in the land,
completely disarmed and at sword point.
Bartleby: I won’t let you betray me again, Finbar! I run him through.
GM: Well, okay, that’s a hack and slash, roll+Str.
Bartleby: If you say so… I got a 7.
GM: Okay, you run him through because he can’t even defend himself and… umm,
wait. You know what, he’s not in melee with you at all. He’s helpless, forget
hack and slash, he’s toast. He slumps to the ground, coughing up blood but the
sound of the guard alarm rings out. What do you do?
** Volley
When you take aim and shoot at an enemy at range, roll+Dex. ✴On a 10+, you have
a clear shot—deal your damage. ✴On a 7–9, choose one (whichever you choose you
deal your damage):
    - You have to move to get the shot placing you in danger as described by the
      GM
    - You have to take what you can get: -1d6 damage
    - You have to take several shots, reducing your ammo by one
Volley covers the entire act of drawing, aiming, and firing a ranged weapon or
throwing a thrown weapon. The advantage to using a ranged weapon over melee is
that the attacker is less likely to be attacked back. Of course they do have to
worry about ammunition and getting a clear shot though.

On a 7–9, read “danger” broadly. It can be bad footing or ending in the path of
a sword or maybe just giving up your sweet sniper nest to your enemies. Whatever
it is, it’s impending and it’s always something that causes the GM to say “What
do you do?” Quite often, the danger will be something that will then require you
to dedicate yourself to avoiding it or force you to defy danger.

If you’re throwing something that doesn’t have ammo (maybe you’ve got a move
that makes your shield throwable) you can’t choose to mark off ammo. Choose from
the other two options instead.
Aranwe: So, I’m stuck down here on the floor of the ritualarium and that orc
eyegouger is chanting his ritual up on the pedestal? Since Thelian has the rest
of the rabble busy, I’ll aim my bow and take a shot at the chanting orc.
GM: An excellent choice—sounds like volley to me.
Aranwe: I got an 8, damn. Well, I’m low on arrows and even lower on HP. I better
take what I can get. I roll my damage, then subtract the results of a d6, right?
I got a 3. Is that enough to distract him, at least?
GM: Sure! The arrow digs into the eyegouger’s leg and he roars in pain,
interrupting the ritual temporarily. Unfortunately, it looks like interruption
might just be worse—a terrible rumbling echoes from the pit under the pedestal
and the masonry of the room begins to crumble. What do you do?
Halek: Kobolds and an ogre? Man, what’s going on here? Well, if they’re coming
to get me, I might as well let my arrows say hello. I take a shot at the mob. I
rolled an 8.
GM: Well, what’ll it be? Danger? Ammo?
Halek: I’ll take the danger.
GM: Well, the kobolds swarm you and you manage to hit one as they approach—he
falls down but as the rest approach, you realize you’ve lost track of the ogre.
He smashes you with his club and you take 12 damage!
Halek: 12 damage? That’s the danger?
GM: You’re right, that’s not just danger. Okay, so you’re not mush yet—the ogre
is looming behind you and that club is flying down at your head! What do you do?
** Defy Danger
When you *act despite an imminent threat* or *suffer a calamity*, say how you
deal with it and roll. If you do it…
    - …by powering through, +Str
    - …by getting out of the way or acting fast, +Dex
    - …by enduring, +Con
    - …with quick thinking, +Int
    - …through mental fortitude, +Wis
    - …using charm and social grace, +Cha
✴On a 10+, you do what you set out to, the threat doesn’t come to bear. ✴On a
7–9, you stumble, hesitate, or flinch: the GM will offer you a worse outcome,
hard bargain, or ugly choice.
You defy danger when you do something in the face of impending peril. This may
seem like a catch-all. It is! Defy danger is for those times when it seems like
you clearly should be rolling but no other move applies.

Defy danger also applies when you make another move despite danger not covered
by that move. For example, hack and slash assumes that’s you’re trading blows in
battle—you don’t need to defy danger because of the monster you’re fighting
unless there’s some specific danger that wouldn’t be part of your normal attack.
On the other hand, if you’re trying to hack and slash while spikes shoot from
hidden traps in the walls, those spikes are a whole different danger.

Danger, here, is anything that requires resilience, concentration, or poise.
This move will usually be called for by the GM. She’ll tell you what the danger
is as you make the move. Something like “You’ll have to defy danger first. The
danger is the steep and icy floor you’re running across. If you can keep your
footing, you can make it to the door before the necromancer’s magic gets you.”

Which stat applies depends on what action you take and your action has to
trigger the move. That means you can’t defy danger from a steep and icy floor
with a charming smile just so you can use Cha, since charmingly smiling at the
icy floor does nothing to it. On the other hand, making a huge leap over the ice
would be Str, placing your feet carefully would be Dex, and so on. Make the move
to get the results.
GM: Emory, as you climb up the side of the ravine you spy a cultist on a ledge
nearby who evokes a frost spell and covers the side of the cliff with ice! If
you want to keep climbing, you need to defy danger or you’ll fall.
Emory: No way, I am too tough. I grit my teeth and dig my nails into the wall,
climbing one hand at a time. I’m using Con, okay? I got an 8, though…
GM: Hmm, well, I think the only way you can gain any traction, tough guy, is if
you use your dagger to pull yourself up the last few feet. It’s going to be
lodged in there until you have some time to pull it loose and there’s an angry
spellcaster nearby.
Emory: I can always get a new dagger when I get home. Time to finish this climb
and that cultist.
GM: The athach is swinging his burly third arm down at you, knobby fingers
gripping a broken branch. What are you doing, Valeria?
Valeria: So he wants to fight, huh? Let’s do it. I hack and slash him, swinging
my sword at his legs.
GM: Now hold on there, champ. He’s already got you at a disadvantage. You can
jump into the fray but you’ll take that club head on unless you defy danger
first.
Valeria: Pfft, he’s no match for Valeria the Red! I leap aside like a leaf in
the wind, then I start hacking and slashing.
GM: Defy danger with your Dex, please and thank you.
Octavia: I’ve had enough of this ogre, I’m going to drop my shield and swing my
hammer in both hands. Hack and slash, right?
GM: You drop your shield? That’s a bad idea–now you have to defy danger because
the ogre is going to bash you.
Octavia: Are you sure? Isn’t that what hack and slash is? Trading blows and
stuff?
GM: Yes, duh, of course. I need another cup of coffee–hack and slash it is, make
your move!
** Defend
When you *stand in defense of a person, item, or location* under attack,
roll+Con. ✴On a 10+, hold 3. ✴On a 7–9, hold 1. As long as you stand in defense,
when you or the thing you defend is attacked you may spend hold, 1 for 1, to
choose an option:
    - Redirect an attack from the thing you defend to yourself
    - Halve the attack’s effect or damage
    - Open up the attacker to an ally giving that ally +1 forward against the
      attacker
    - Deal damage to the attacker equal to your level
Defending something means standing nearby and focusing on preventing attacks
against that thing or stopping anyone from getting near it. When you’re no
longer nearby or you stop devoting your attention to incoming attacks then you
lose any hold you might have had.

You can only spend hold when someone makes an attack on you or the thing you’re
defending. The choices you can make depend on the attacker and the type of
attack. In particular, you can’t deal damage to an attacker who you can’t reach
with your weapon.

An attack is any action you can interfere with that has harmful effects. Swords
and arrows are attacks, of course, but so are spells, grabs, and charges.

If the attack doesn’t deal damage then halving it means the attacker gets some
of what they want but not all of it. It’s up to you and the GM to work out what
that means depending on the circumstances. If you’re defending the Gem Eye of
Oro-Uht and an orc tries to grab it from its pedestal then half effect might
mean that the gem gets knocked to the floor but the orc doesn’t get his hands on
it, yet. Or maybe the orc gets a hold of it but so do you—now you’re both
fighting over it, tooth and nail. If you and the GM can’t agree on a halved
effect you can’t choose that option.

Defending yourself is certainly an option. It amounts to giving up on making
attacks and just trying to keep yourself safe.
GM: Avon, you begin weaving the spell to push the necromancer’s ghost back
through the gates but the zombies are bearing down on you.
Lux: Don’t worry, squishy Avon, I will save you. While Avon casts his spell, I
swear to protect him—I slam my hammer on my shield and yell “If you want to stop
him, you’ll have to come through me.” I’d like to defend Avon.
GM: And with such gusto, too. Roll+Con.
Lux: I get an 11, three hold, right?
Avon: Better get ready to use it, Lux. I got an 8 on my spellcasting roll—I
choose to put myself in danger.
GM: Of course you do. The zombies are drawn by the magical disturbance, lurching
toward you on the attack. Suddenly, you’re swarmed by them, they’re everywhere!
What do you do?
Avon: Squeak helplessly?
Lux: I’m on it. I spend a point of my hold to redirect the attack to me—I shove
Avon aside and let the full fury of my goodness spill out in waves, angering the
undead. To be safe, I’m going to whip my hammer in an arc and deal my damage. I
might as well use it all up and reduce the damage by half. My god protects us!
GM: So, Hadrian, you’ve been defending Durga while she heals Willem, but now
Willem is better. What do you do?
Durga: I leap forward to drive back the troglodytes!
Hadrian: I want to tangle with this crocodilian.
GM: Okay, Durga, the trogs come at you with their clubs.
Hadrian: No way, I still have hold left over, I want to spend it to redirect
that attack to myself.
GM: You two are spread out, now. How are you going to do that if you’re 20 yards
away? You lost your hold when you attacked the croc, my friend.
Hadrian: Yeah, I guess I’m not “standing in defense” anymore. Forget it, you’re
on your own, Durga!
** Spout Lore
When you *consult your accumulated knowledge about something*, roll+Int. ✴On a
10+, the GM will tell you something interesting and useful about the subject
relevant to your situation. ✴On a 7–9, the GM will only tell you something
interesting—it’s on you to make it useful. The GM might ask you “How do you know
this?” Tell them the truth, now.
You spout lore any time you want to search your memory for knowledge or facts
about something. You take a moment to ponder the things you know about the
Orcish Tribes or the Tower of Ul’dammar and then reveal that knowledge.

The knowledge you get is like consulting a bestiary, travel guide, or library.
You get facts about the subject matter. On a 10+ the GM will show you how those
facts can be immediately useful, on a 7–9 they’re just facts.

On a miss the GM’s move will often involve the time you take thinking. Maybe you
miss that goblin moving around behind you, or the tripwire across the hallway.
It’s also a great chance to reveal an unwelcome truth.

Just in case it isn’t clear: the answers are always true, even if the GM had to
make them up on the spot. Always say what honesty demands.
Fenfaril: The floor was illusory? Damn those gnomes. Damn them straight to
wherever gnomes go when they’re dead.
GM: Heh, yep. You’re in a murky pit, and there’s a shadowy humanoid shape,
mottled and eyeless, moving towards you, mumbling.
Fenfaril: Mumbling shape, huh? What is that thing? Is it going to attack me? I’m
sure I’ve read about them somewhere before, maybe at school?
GM: Could be. Spout lore!
Fenfaril: Bestow your knowledge upon me, brain. I rolled an 8.
GM: Well, of course you know of these things—the name escapes you but you
definitely remember a drawing of a creature like this. It was in a hallway,
standing guard over something. You know there’s a trick to get it to let you
pass but you can’t quite remember. Why not?
Fenfaril: Obviously I was hungover that day. I was a terrible student. A trick,
you say? Hmm…
Vitus: I got a 10 on my spout lore about this gilded skull.
GM: You’re pretty sure you recognize the metalwork of Dis, the living city.
Vitus: …and? I did get a 10!
GM: Right, of course. Well, you recognize a few glyphs specifically. They’re
efreeti, marks of a fire spell, but they’re different, a kind of transmutation
magic. I bet if you cast a spell into the skull, it’ll turn it into a fire
spell.
Vitus: Magic missiles of fire—hurrah!
** Discern Realities
When you closely study a situation or person, roll+Wis. ✴On a 10+, ask the GM 3
questions from the list below. ✴On a 7–9, ask 1.

Either way, take +1 forward when acting on the answers.
    - What happened here recently?
    - What is about to happen?
    - What should I be on the lookout for?
    - What here is useful or valuable to me?
    - Who’s really in control here?
    - What here is not what it appears to be?
To discern realities you must closely observe your target. That usually means
interacting with it or watching someone else do the same. You can’t just stick
your head in the doorway and discern realities about a room. You’re not merely
scanning for clues—you have to look under and around things, tap the walls, and
check for weird dust patterns on the bookshelves. That sort of thing.

Discerning realities isn’t just about noticing a detail, it’s about figuring out
the bigger picture. The GM always describes what the player characters
experience honestly, so during a fight the GM will say that the kobold mage
stays at the other end of the hall. Discerning realities could reveal the reason
behind that: the kobold’s motions reveal that he’s actually pulling energy from
the room behind him, he can’t come any closer.

Just like spout lore, the answers you get are always honest ones. Even if the GM
has to figure it out on the spot. Once they answer, it’s set in stone. You’ll
want to discern realities to find the truth behind illusions—magical or
otherwise.

Unless a move says otherwise players can only ask questions from the list. If a
player asks a question not on the list the GM can tell them to try again or
answer a question from the list that seems equivalent.

Of course, some questions might have a negative answer, that’s fine. If there
really, honestly is nothing useful or valuable here, the GM will answer that
question with “Nothing, sorry.”
Omar: I don’t trust this room—I’m going to poke around a little. I take out my
tools and start messing with stuff. I pull candlesticks and tap the walls with
my hammer. My usual tricks.
GM: Discern realities?
Omar: Oh yes. I discern all the realities. I got a 12. I want to know “What here
is not as it appears to be?”
GM: Well, it’s obvious to you that the wall on the north side of the room has a
hollow spot. The stones are newer and the mortar is fresher, probably a hidden
alcove or passageway.
Omar: I want to ask another one. “Who sealed the room.”
GM: That’s not on the list, so I’m going pretend you asked “What happened here
recently.” Looking at the stonework, you notice the wall actually bends out in
places. The work is shoddy and awful—looks to you like the work of goblins. The
only way it’d get bent out that way, though, is if there was something pushing
it from within.
Omar: So either the goblins blocked it from the other side, or there’s something
in there that tried to get out.
GM: Bingo.
** Parley
When you have leverage on a GM Character and manipulate them, roll+Cha. Leverage
is something they need or want. ✴On a 10+, they do what you ask if you first
promise what they ask of you. ✴On a 7–9, they will do what you ask, but need
some concrete assurance of your promise, right now.
Parley covers a lot of ground including old standbys like intimidation and
diplomacy. You know you’re using parley when you’re trying to get someone to do
something for you by holding a promise or threat over them. Your leverage can be
nasty or nice, the tone doesn’t matter.

Merely asking someone politely isn’t parleying. That’s just talking. You say,
“Can I have that magic sword?” and Sir Telric says, “Hell no, this is my blade,
my father forged it and my mother enchanted it” and that’s that. To parley, you
have to have leverage. Leverage is anything that could lure the target of your
parley to do something for you. Maybe it’s something they want or something they
don’t want you to do. Like a sack of gold. Or punching them in the face. What
counts as leverage depends on the people involved and the request being made.
Threaten a lone goblin with death and you have leverage. Threaten a goblin
backed up by his gang with death and he might think he’s better off in a fight.

On a 7+ they ask you for something related to whatever leverage you have. If
your leverage is that you’re standing before them sharpening your knife and
insinuating about how much you’d like to shank them with it they might ask you
to let them go. If your leverage is your position in court above them they might
ask for a favor.

Whatever they ask for, on a 10+, you just have to promise it clearly and
unambiguously. On a 7–9, that’s not enough: you also have to give them some
assurance, right now, before they do what you want. If you promise that you’ll
ensure their safety from the wolves if they do what you want and you roll a 7–9
they won’t do their part until you bring a fresh wolf pelt to prove you can do
it, for example. It’s worth noting that you don’t actually have to keep your
promise. Whether you’ll follow up or not, well, that’s up to you. Of course
breaking promises leads to problems. People don’t take kindly to oath-breakers
and aren’t likely to deal with them in the future.

In some cases when you state what you want you may include a possible promise
for the creature to make, as in “flee and I’ll let you live.” It’s up to the
target of the parley if that’s the promise they want or if they have something
else in mind. They can say “yes, let me live and I’ll go” (with assurances, if
you rolled a 7–9) or “promise me you won’t follow me.”
Leena: “Lord Hywn, I need you to vouch for me or the Queen will never grant me
an audience.”
GM: He’s not really convinced—it could be a big hit to his reputation if you
embarrass him. “Why should I help you, Leena?”
Leena: Oh, while I talk to him, I absentmindedly play with the signet ring from
that assassin we killed. The one he hired to off the prince. I make sure he sees
it.
GM: Oh boy, okay. Roll parley.
Leena: An 8.
GM: “Enough being coy!” he looks at you cold and angry. “You and I both know you
murdered my hired man. Give me the ring, swear to silence, and I’ll do as you
ask.”
Leena: I toss it to him. We can always dig up more dirt on this scumbag later.
Pendrell: This is the place where One Eye plays cards, right? Okay, I walk up to
the guard. “Hey there fellows, care to, you know, open the door and let me in?”
and I’m being all suave and cool so they’ll do it. Parley is roll+Cha right?
GM: Not so fast, slick. All you’ve done is say what you want. The big smelly one
on the right steps in front of you and says, “Sorry sir, private game,” all
bored-sounding. It’s like he hates his job and wishes he were someplace else. If
you want to parley, you’re going to need some leverage. Maybe a bribe?
** Aid or Interfere
When you *help or hinder someone *, roll+bond with them. ✴On a 10+, they take +1
or -2 to their roll, your choice. ✴On a 7–9, they still get a modifier, but you
also expose yourself to danger, retribution, or cost.
Any time you feel like two players should be rolling against each other, the
defender should be interfering with the attacker. This doesn’t always mean
sabotaging them. It can mean anything from arguing against a parley to just
being a shifty person who’s hard to discern. It’s about getting in the way of
another players’ success.

Always ask the person aiding or interfering how they are doing it. As long as
they can answer that, they trigger the move. Sometimes, as the GM, you’ll have
to ask if interference is happening. Your players might not always notice
they’re interfering with each other.

Aid is a little more obvious. If a player can explain how they’re helping with a
move and it makes sense, let them roll to aid.

No matter how many people aid or interfere with a given roll, the target only
gets the +1 or -2 once. Even if a whole party of adventurers aid in attacking an
ogre, the one who makes the final attack only gets +1.
GM: Ozruk, you stand alone and bloodied before a pack of angry hellhounds.
Behind you cowers the Prince of Lescia, weeping in terror.
Ozruk: I stand firm and lift my shield. Despite certain doom, I will do my duty
and defend the princeling.
Aronwe: I emerge from the shadows and draw my sword! “Doom is not so certain,
dwarf!” I stand beside him. I want to help him defend. “Though I do not know you
well, I have seen you in battle, Ozruk. If we are to die today, we die as
brothers!” I don’t have any bonds with him but I want to try anyway.
GM: Touching, really. Okay, roll+0 and if you succeed, Ozruk, take +1 to your
defend attempt. Here we go!
* Special Moves
Special moves are moves that come up less often or in more specific situations.
They’re still the basis of what characters do in Dungeon World—particularly what
they do between dungeon crawls and high-flying adventures.
** Last Breath
When you’re dying you catch a glimpse of what lies beyond the Black Gates of
Death’s Kingdom (the GM will describe it). Then roll (just roll, +nothing—yeah,
Death doesn’t care how tough or cool you are). ✴On a 10+, you’ve cheated
Death—you’re in a bad spot but you’re still alive. ✴On a 7–9, Death himself will
offer you a bargain. Take it and stabilize or refuse and pass beyond the Black
Gates into whatever fate awaits you. ✴On 6-, your fate is sealed. You’re marked
as Death’s own and you’ll cross the threshold soon. The GM will tell you when.
The Last Breath is that moment standing between life and death. Time stands
still as Death appears to claim the living for his own. Even those who do not
pass beyond the Black Gates catch a glimpse of the other side and what might
await them—friends and enemies past, rewards or punishment for acts in life or
other, stranger vistas. All are changed in some way by this moment—even those
who escape.

There are three outcomes to this move. On a 10+, the Character has cheated Death
in some meaningful way. He’s escaped with something that, by rights, isn’t his
anymore. Death is powerless to stop this, but he remembers this slight. On a
7–9, the GM should offer a real choice with significant consequence. Think about
the behaviors of the character and the things you’ve learned about him in play.
Death knows and sees all and tailors his bargains accordingly. This is a trade,
remember. Offer something that will be a challenge to play out but will lead the
game in fun new direction. On a miss, death is inevitable. The most obvious
approach is to say “Death takes you across the threshold, into his bleak
kingdom.” and move on. However, sometimes Death comes slowly. You might say “you
have a week to live” or “you can feel the cold hand of Death on you…” and leave
it at that, for now. The player may want to give in and accept death at this
point—that’s okay. Let them create a new character as normal. The key thing to
remember is that a brush with death, succeed or fail, is a significant moment
that should always lead to change.
GM: Sparrow, as the knife blade disappears into your guts, the world fades away
and you stand before the Black Gates of Death. Among the throngs of suffering
souls, you spot Lord Hwyn, that sickly cur. It looks like all his ill deals
caught up with him at last. He spots you across the bleak gulf and you feel the
chill of his hunger in your very soul. Take your Last Breath.
Sparrow: Heavy. I got a 9.
GM: Death appears to you, wisps of black cloth dancing around his shadowy form.
A pale hand touches your face. You hear his voice in your mind. “Come to me so
soon, pretty Sparrow? You follow a river of souls, sent here by your blade. I do
so love you for them. I’ll return you to the world, but you must make me a
promise. In shadow you dwell, so shadow you shall become. Shun the light of day
forever or find a quick trip back to my company. What do you say, little thief?”
Sparrow: (gulp)
** Encumbrance
When you make a move while carrying weight you may be encumbered. If your weight
carried is:
    - Equal to or less than your load, you suffer no penalty
    - Less than or equal to your load+2, you take -1 ongoing until you lighten
      your burden
    - Greater than your load+2, you have a choice: drop at least 1 weight and
      roll at -1, or automatically fail
A PC’s load stat is determined by their class and Str. Being able to haul more
is a clear benefit when trying to carry treasure out of a dungeon or just making
sure you can bring along what you need.

This move only applies to things a person could walk around with and still act.
Carrying a boulder on your back is not encumbrance—you can’t really act or move
much with it. It affects what moves you can make appropriately in the fiction.
** Make Camp
When you *settle in to rest* consume a ration. If you’re somewhere dangerous
decide the watch order as well. If you have enough XP you may level up. When you
wake from at least a few uninterrupted hours of sleep heal damage equal to half
your max HP.
You usually make camp so that you can do other things, like prepare spells or
commune with your god. Or, you know, sleep soundly at night. Whenever you stop
to catch your breath for more than an hour or so, you’ve probably made camp.

Staying a night in an inn or house is making camp, too. Regain your hit points
as usual, but only mark off a ration if you’re eating from the food you carry,
not paying for a meal or receiving hospitality.
** Take Watch
When you’re on watch and something approaches the camp roll+Wis. ✴On a 10+,
you’re able to wake the camp and prepare a response, everyone in the camp takes
+1 forward. ✴On a 7–9, you react just a moment too late; your companions in camp
are awake but haven’t had time to prepare. They have weapons and armor but
little else. ✴On a miss, whatever lurks outside the campfire’s light has the
drop on you.
** Undertake a Perilous Journey
When you *travel through hostile territory*, choose one member of the party to
act as /trailblazer/, one to /scout/ ahead, and one to be /quartermaster/. Each
character with a job to do rolls+Wis. ✴On a 10+:
    - the quartermaster reduces the number of rations required by one
    - the trailblazer reduces the amount of time it takes to reach your
      destination (the GM will say by how much)
    - the scout will spot any trouble quick enough to let you get the drop on it
✴On a 7–9, each role performs their job as expected: the normal number of
rations are consumed, the journey takes about as long as expected, no one gets
the drop on you but you don’t get the drop on them either.
You can’t assign more than one job to a character. If you don’t have enough
party members, or choose not to assign a job, treat that job as if it had been
assigned and the responsible player had rolled a 6.

Distances in Dungeon World are measured in rations. A ration is the amount of
supplies used up in a day. Journeys take more rations when they are long or when
travel is slow.

A perilous journey is the whole way between two locations. You don’t roll for
one day’s journey and then make camp only to roll for the next day’s journey,
too. Make one roll for the entire trip.

This move only applies when you know where you’re going. Setting off to explore
is not a perilous journey. It’s wandering around looking for cool things to
discover. Use up rations as you camp and the GM will give you details about the
world as you discover them.
** End of Session
When you *reach the end of a session*, choose one of your bonds that you feel is
resolved (completely explored, no longer relevant, or otherwise). Ask the player
of the character you have the bond with if they agree. If they do, mark XP and
write a new bond with whomever you wish.

Once bonds have been updated look at your alignment. If you fulfilled that
alignment at least once this session, mark XP. Then answer these three questions
as a group:
    - Did we learn something new and important about the world?
    - Did we overcome a notable monster or enemy?
    - Did we loot a memorable treasure?
For each “yes” answer everyone marks XP.
** Level Up
When you *have downtime (hours or days) and XP equal to (or greater than) your
current level+7*, you can reflect on your experiences and hone your skills.
    - Subtract your current level+7 from your XP.
    - Increase your level by 1.
    - Choose a new advanced move from your class.
    - If you are the wizard, you also get to add a new spell to your spellbook.
    - Choose one of your stats and increase it by 1 (this may change your
      modifier). Changing your Constitution increases your maximum and current
      HP. Ability scores can’t go higher than 18.
** Carouse
When you return triumphant and throw a big party, spend 100 coins and roll +1
for every extra 100 coins spent. ✴On a 10+, choose 3. ✴On a 7–9, choose 1. ✴On a
miss, you still choose one, but things get really out of hand (the GM will say
how).
    - You befriend a useful NPC.
    - You hear rumors of an opportunity.
    - You gain useful information.
    - You are not entangled, ensorcelled, or tricked.
You can only carouse when you return triumphant. That’s what draws the crowd of
revelers to surround adventurers as they celebrate their latest haul. If you
don’t proclaim your success or your failure, then who would want to party with
you anyway?
** Supply
When you go to buy something with gold on hand, if it’s something readily
available in the settlement you’re in, you can buy it at market price. If it’s
something special, beyond what’s usually available here, or non-mundane,
roll+Cha. ✴On a 10+, you find what you’re looking for at a fair price. ✴On a
7–9, you’ll have to pay more or settle for something that’s not exactly what you
wanted, but close. The GM will tell you what your options are.
** Recover
When you *do nothing but rest in comfort and safety* after a day of rest you
recover all your HP. After three days of rest you remove one debility of your
choice. If you’re under the care of a healer (magical or otherwise) you heal a
debility for every two days of rest instead.
** Recruit
When you put out word that you’re looking to hire help, roll:
    - +1 if you make it known that your pay is generous
    - +1 if you make it known what you’re setting out to do
    - +1 if you make it known that they’ll get a share of whatever you find
    - +1 if you have a useful reputation around these parts
✴On a 10+, you’ve got your pick of a number of skilled applicants, your choice
who you hire, no penalty for not taking them along. ✴On a 7–9, you’ll have to
settle for someone close to what you want or turn them away. ✴On a miss someone
influential and ill-suited declares they’d like to come along (a foolhardy
youth, a loose-cannon, or a veiled enemy, for example), bring them and take the
consequences or turn them away. If you turn away applicants you take -1 forward
to recruit.
** Outstanding Warrants
When you *return to a civilized place in which you’ve caused trouble before*,
roll+Cha. ✴On a 10+, word has spread of your deeds and everyone recognizes you.
✴On a 7–9, as above, and the GM chooses a complication:
    - The local constabulary has a warrant out for your arrest.
    - Someone has put a price on your head.
    - Someone important to you has been put in a bad spot as a result of your
      actions.
This move is only for places where you’ve caused trouble, not every patch of
civilization you enter. Being publicly caught up in someone else’s trouble still
triggers this move.

Civilization generally means the villages, towns and cities of humans, elves,
dwarves, and halflings but it can also apply to any relatively lawful
establishment of monstrous species, such as orcs or goblins. If the PCs have
stayed in a place as part of the community, it counts as civilization.
** Bolster
When you *spend your leisure time in study, meditation, or hard practice,* you
gain preparation. If you prepare for a week or more, take 1 preparation. If you
prepare for a month or longer, take 3 instead. When your preparation pays off
spend 1 preparation for +1 to any roll. You can only spend one preparation per
roll.
* Moves in Detail
* Multiclass Moves
** Multiclass Dabbler
** Multiclass Initiate
** Multiclass Master
For the purposes of these multiclass moves the cleric’s commune and cast a spell
count as one move. Likewise for the wizard’s spellbook, prepare Spells, and cast
a Spell.

When you first select a multiclass move that grants you the ability to cast
spells you prepare and cast spells as if you had one level in the casting class.
Every additional time you level up you increase the level you prepare and cast
spells at by one.
When Ajax gains 3rd level he takes Multiclass Dabbler to get Commune and Cast a
Spell from the Cleric class. He casts and prepares spells like a first level
Cleric: first level spells and rotes only, a total of 2 levels of spells
prepared. When he later gains 4th level, he prepares and casts spells as a
second level Cleric.
* Bard Moves
** Bardic Lore
Treat the areas of your lore like books. Is the upwards-flowing waterfall you
just came across something important that would be covered in a book or college
course called “On Spells and Magicks?” If so, your Bardic Lore of that name
applies.

If you care enough to ask a question about it then it’s probably important.
Don’t second guess yourself: if you care enough to want to know more about it
then it has some importance.
** Charming and Open
Speaking frankly means you really are being open with them, not just giving the
appearance of openness. It’s your true sincerity that puts others at ease and
lets you get information out of them; if you’re trying to maintain a lie at the
same time you won’t get very far.
** It Goes To Eleven
Of course, the creature you effect must have some way of harming your target of
choice. Spurring a wolf into a frenzy to attack the eagle lord circling above
doesn’t do any good, the wolf doesn’t have a way to attack it.
** An Ear for Magic
Acting on the answers can mean acting against them or taking advantage of them.
Either way you take +1 forward.
* Cleric
** Commune
If you like you can prepare the same spell more than once.
* Cleric Spells
** Guidance
It’s up to the creativity of your deity (and the GM) to communicate as much as
possible through the motions and gestures of your deity’s symbol. You don’t get
visions or a voice from heaven, just some visual cue of what your deity would
have you do (even if it’s not in your best interest).
** Magic Weapon
Casting Magic Weapon on the same weapon again has no effect. No matter how many
times you cast it on the same weapon it’s still just magic +1d4 damage.

That said, even a weak enchantment is nothing to be scoffed at. Having a magic
weapon may give you an advantage against some of the stranger beasts of Dungeon
World, ghosts and the like. The exact effects depend on the monster and
circumstances, so make the most of it.
** Animate Dead
Treating the zombie as your character means you make moves with its stats based
on the fiction, just like always. Unless its brain is functioning on its own,
the zombie can’t do much besides follow the last order it was given, so you’d
better stay close. Even if its brain works it’s still bound to follow your
orders.
* Fighter Moves
** Signature Weapon
The base description you choose is just a description. Choosing a spear doesn’t
give you Close range, for example. You could choose a spear as the description,
then Hand as the range. Your spear is something special, or your technique with
it is different, just describe why your weapon has the tags you’ve chosen.
** Heirloom
The exact nature of the spirits (and therefore what knowledge they can offer to
you) is up to you and the GM to decide. Maybe they’re dead ancestors, echoes of
people you’ve slain, or a minor demon. Up to you.
** Armor Mastery
Armor and shields that are reduced to 0 armor are effectively destroyed. You’ll
pretty much be paying for a new one anyway, so you might as well drop them and
haul out some gold instead.
* Paladin Moves
** Evidence of Faith
Your +1 forward applies to anything you do based on your knowledge of the
spell’s effects: defying it, defending against it, using it to your advantage,
etc.
* Ranger Moves
** Command
Your bonuses only apply when your animal is doing something it’s trained in. An
animal not trained to attack monsters won’t be any help when you’re attacking an
otyugh.
* Thief Moves
** Backstab
Reducing armor until they repair it means that they lose armor until they do
something that compensates for your damage. If you’re fighting an armored knight
that might mean a fresh suit of armor, but for a thick-hided ogre it’s until
they’ve had time to heal up (or protect the wound you left).
** Poisoner
In order to make more doses of your chosen poison you need to be reasonably able
to gather the required materials. If you’re locked up at the top of a tower
you’re not going to be able to get the materials you need.
** Wealth and Taste
In order to use this move it’s really got to be your most valuable possession.
It’s the honest value you place on it that draws others, no lies.
** Disguise
Your disguise covers your appearance and any basics like accents and limps. It
doesn’t grant you any special knowledge of the target, so if someone asks you
what your favorite color is you’d better think fast. Defying danger with CHA is
a common part of maintaining a disguise.
* Wizard Moves
** Prepare Spells
You can prepare the same spell more than once if you like.
** Empowered Magic
Maximizing the effects of a spell is simple for spells that involve a roll: a
maximized Magic Missile does 8 damage. In other cases it’s down to the
circumstances. A maximized Identify might result in far more information than
expected. If there’s no clear way to maximize it you can’t choose that option.

Likewise for doubling the targets. If the spell doesn’t have targets you can’t
choose to double them.
* Wizard Spells
** Dispel Magic
The exact effects depend on the circumstances. A goblin orkaster’s spell might
just be ended, while a deity’s consecration is probably just dimmed. The GM will
tell you the likely effects of Dispelling a given effect before you cast.
** Fireball
“Nearby”depends on context; a few paces or so in an open space, considerably
more in an enclosed room. Be careful!.
** Polymorph
In some cases the GM may choose the last option more than once to list each
unexpected benefit or weakness.
** Summon Monster
The exact type of monster you get is up to the GM, based on your choices. If you
want a non-reckless swimming creature you might get a water elemental, a 1d8
damage +2 Str creature might be a barbed devil. Whatever the creature is you
still get to play it.
